The members of the Monetary Policy Committee analyzed the recent performance of and prospects for the 
Brazilian and international economies under the monetary policy framework, which is designed to comply 
with the inflation targets established by the government. 
 
Recent Evolution of Inflation 
  
1. 
While most goods and services in the consumer basket decelerated in March, consumer price inflation 
remained high mainly due to isolated price increases (specifically certain regulated prices). In particular, Broad 
National Consumer Price Index (IPCA) inflation was virtually unchanged in March compared to February, due to the 
aforementioned acceleration of some regulated prices. Wholesale agricultural prices also increased, reflecting the 
effects of the drought on grain harvests. 
  
2. 
In March, the IPCA rose 0.61%, compared to 0.59% in February. The accumulated increase in the quarter 
reached 1.79%, and in the twelve months through March totaled 7.54%. Regulated prices rose 1.29% in the month 
and accounted for 0.38 p.p. of the monthly change in the IPCA, driven by adjustments to urban bus fares in São 
Paulo and Porto Alegre (contributing 0.25 p.p.), and water and sewage in six capital cities (contributing 0.08 p.p.). 
Market prices rose 0.33% (versus 0.77% in February), accounting for the remaining 0.23 p.p. of the IPCA monthly 
 
1

change. Education, which increased 0.4% in March compared to 5.3% in February, contributed significantly to the 
deceleration in market prices.   
 
3. 
The General Price Index (IGP-DI) rose 0.99% in March, compared to 0.40% in February, for an 
accumulated 1.73% in the first quarter of the year, and a 10.92% increase in twelve months. Among the IGP-DI 
components in March, the Consumer Price Index – Brazil (IPC-Br) rose 0.70%, after a 0.43% increase in February, 
reflecting the same transport and housing price pressures that impacted the IPCA. The National Index of Civil 
Construction (INCC) rose 0.67%, above the 0.44% increase in February, due to labor cost increases. The 
Wholesale Price Index (IPA-DI) rose 1.14%, versus 0.39% in February, accumulating a twelve-month increase of 
12.80%.  
 
4. 
The acceleration of IPA-DI inflation in March was mainly due to the 3.59% increase in agricultural prices 
(up 1.29% in February), driven by increases in the prices of rice, corn, wheat and soy. Industrial prices rose 0.30% 
(versus 0.08% in February). IPA inflation for final and intermediate goods cooled from February to March, while raw 
material prices increased 2.91%, after falling 1.1% in February, mainly due to agricultural components.  
  
5. 
IPCA core inflation, calculated under the trimmed means methods, accelerated in March. The smoothed 
core reached 0.62%, compared to 0.60% in the previous month, and totaled 7.42% in the twelve months through 
March. The non-smoothed core rose to 0.49% from 0.43% in February, with an accumulated twelve-month 
increase of 6.33% through March.  
  
6. 
IPCA core inflation calculated by the exclusion of household food and regulated prices fell to 0.41% in 
March, from 0.93% in February, due to the easing of seasonal education price pressures. This measure of core 
inflation increased 7.31% in the twelve months through March. 
  
7. 
IPC-Br core inflation, calculated by the Getúlio Vargas Foundation (FGV) under the symmetric trimmed 
means method, reached 0.49% in March from 0.36% in February, for a cumulative twelve-month increase of 
5.68%.   
  
8. 
The IPCA diffusion index fell for the second consecutive month, reaching 63.9% in March (64.6% in 
February and 73.2% in January). 
 
Assessment of Inflation Trends 
 
9. 
The inflation shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information. The 
scenario considered in the simulations used the following assumptions: 
  
a) The projection for the adjustment of both gasoline and bottled gas prices for 2005 remained unchanged 
at 0%; 
 
b) Projections for adjustments of fixed telephone rates for 2005 fell to 7.9% from 8.7% as of the previous 
meeting, while projections for adjustments of household electricity increased to 10.8% from 9.5%;  
 
c) For all regulated prices, which represented a total weight of 29.4% in the March IPCA, a 7.2% increase 
is projected for 2005 (0.3 p.p above the prior projection); 
 
d) The projection for regulated price adjustments in 2006, following the model of endogenous 
determination, which takes into account seasonal components, the exchange rate, market price inflation, 
and the change in the IGP-DI, stands at 5.1%;  
 
e) The projection for the 6-month spread over the Selic rate, following the specification of a Vector 
Autoregressive model based on the Selic and the swap rates on the eve of the Copom meeting, increases 
from 34 basis points in the second quarter of 2005 to 44 basis points in the last quarter of 2006. 
 
 
2

10. 
Regarding fiscal policy, it is assumed that the consolidated public sector primary surplus target of 4.25% of 
GDP for 2005 and 2006 will be achieved. The related assumptions considered in the March Copom meeting were 
maintained. 
  
11. 
Assuming the maintenance of the Selic rate at 19.25% p.a. and the exchange rate at the level prevailing on 
the eve of the Copom meeting (R$/US$2.60), the IPCA inflation rate was projected above the 5.1% objective for 
2005, but below the 4.5% central target for 2006. Using the consensus Selic rate and exchange rate projections 
compiled by the BCB’s Investor Relations Group (Gerin) on the eve of the Copom meeting, inflation was also 
projected above the 2005 objective and above the 2006 central target.  
 
Monetary Policy Decision 
  
 
12. 
IPCA inflation rose 0.61% in March, virtually unchanged compared to the two previous months. The March 
IPCA was significantly influenced by adjustments in urban bus fares and water and sewage fees. On the other 
hand, the impact of the annual adjustment of school tuition fees dissipated, and as a result, market prices 
decelerated, especially non-tradables. Even though inflation remained at a level similar to that of January and 
February, a reduction in the number of items registering price increases occurred, as had happened in February.     
 
13. 
IGP-DI inflation accelerated for the second consecutive month, reaching 0.99% in March, mainly driven by 
the IPA upsurge. As happened in February, the increase in wholesale price inflation was due to strong pressure 
from agricultural prices (up 3.59%, versus 1.29% in February and -0.63% in January), owing to adverse weather 
conditions. Agricultural price increases may continue in the coming months, reflecting the recent increase in 
international agricultural commodity prices. Industrial IPA has posted only modest changes since December, but 
recently registered a slight acceleration. As highlighted in the March Copom Minutes, the minimal increases in the 
industrial IPA in recent months partially reflects the exchange rate appreciation and the effects of monetary policy, 
and may positively affect the future evolution of consumer prices. Naturally, the intensity of the pass-through will 
depend on prospective demand conditions and price setters’ expectations relative to the inflation trajectory. 
  
14. 
Core IPCA inflation calculated by excluding household food items and regulated prices decelerated 
strongly in March, due to the end of the effects of school tuition fee increases and the fact that this core measure 
does not consider the recent sharp increases in regulated prices. Had education costs also been excluded, this 
core would have decelerated steadily in recent months. In turn, trimmed-means core inflation, both with and without 
smoothing, accelerated in March when compared to February, partially incorporating items affected by seasonal 
factors. Throughout the first quarter, the trend of underlying core inflation remained above the target path, even 
considering the deceleration observed relative to the fourth quarter of 2004. 
  
15. 
According to seasonally adjusted data from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), 
industrial output declined for the second consecutive month in February. While this result contradicted that 
suggested by leading and coincident indicators, the accommodation of industrial activity is unsurprising given its 
elevated levels at the close of 2004. In addition, specific factors, such as the delay in the sugar-cane harvest and 
the slowdown in oil refining, could have influenced the February result. February industrial performance could also 
be reflecting fluctuations inherent to the series and the seasonal adjustment process for moving holidays. As 
emphasized in the March Copom Minutes, the economy continues to show signs of expansion; however, at a 
slower pace than that registered in 2004. Analyzing the more stable three-month moving average series, which 
smoothes the seasonal and calendar effects, industrial output remained stable in recent months. Leading and 
coincident indicators signal industrial production expansion in March. 
  
16. 
In terms of the composition of industrial activity, consumer goods continued to expand on a three-month 
moving average basis, relative to January. Consumer durable goods production expanded most strongly, at 3.2%, 
driven by the strong growth in production of exports goods – such as cell phones and cars. The production of 
consumer semi-durables and non-durables grew at a slower pace, of 0.84%. The other categories registered 
deceleration. The pattern registered in February, in which consumer durables posted strong performance while 
more income-sensitive sectors lost dynamism and even declined in month-on-month seasonally adjusted terms, 
appears inconsistent with the current stage of the economic cycle.  Given the recent monetary policy stance and 
the positive evolution of the labor market, one would expect economic activity to be increasingly sustained by 
 
3

income-sensitive sectors. The aforementioned specific factors that negatively impacted industrial production in 
February also had a particularly strong impact on the more income-dependent categories, making it more difficult to 
assess both aggregate and disaggregated industrial activity data. More data will be necessary to better 
characterize changes in the pattern of industrial activity. 
 
17. 
The labor market has followed the seasonal pattern observed in prior years, with the unemployment rate 
increasing for the second consecutive month to 10.6% in February, from 10.2% in January, but remaining below 
the level of last year. The number of employed workers declined slightly from January to February, while payrolls 
and real average earnings rose in the period. National Industry Confederation (CNI) data, seasonally adjusted by 
the BCB, shows that industrial employment continued the expansion begun in December 2003, while real industrial 
payrolls held steady in February relative to January, but at a level significantly above that of February 2004. Data 
from the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MTE) on formal employment showed a 6.4% increase in the first two 
months of the year. 
 
18. 
After expanding significantly through 2004, retail sales have shown some accommodation in the initial 
months of 2005. In February, sales fell 3.2%, according to IBGE data, seasonally adjusted by the BCB. This result 
could have been influenced by the same seasonal adjustment problems discussed for industrial production. 
Furniture and household appliance sales posted the strongest growth, at 0.7%, while all other categories 
contracted. On a three-month moving average basis, sales continued to grow, driven by the expansion in furniture 
and household appliances, while the other categories declined. This contrast between the performance of 
consumer durable and non-durable sales is similar to that observed for industrial production, and is equally out of 
tune with what one would expect at this stage of the economic cycle. As in the case of industrial output, more data 
will be necessary to better characterize changes in the pattern of retail sales. 
 
19. 
As repeatedly emphasized in prior Copom Minutes, given the strong expansion of economic activity since 
2003, the performance of aggregate supply in the coming quarters remains a key point of concern with regard to 
prospective inflation dynamics. Installed capacity utilization, measured by CNI and seasonally adjusted by the BCB, 
declined in February (81.9%), potentially reflecting the maturation of new investments made in recent months and 
also the accommodation in economic activity. Despite the recent evolution, the index remains at historic highs. 
Capital goods absorption grew a cumulative 2.8% in the first two months of the year, in seasonally adjusted terms. 
Given the strong growth of investment in 2004, one can expect that there will be a reduction in its pace of growth as 
results will be compared to a higher base. 
 
20. 
Strong trade surpluses continued in March, reinforcing the favorable outlook for the year. Exports and 
imports continued to expand at a strong pace in the first quarter of the year, relative to the same period of 2004. In 
the twelve months through March, exports grew 31.0%, relative to the preceding twelve months, while imports grew 
30.3%, on the back of strong domestic demand. In monthly terms, both exports and imports grew in March at a 
pace slightly below that of February. The trade balance reached a twelve-month cumulative US$35.9 billion surplus 
in March, an increase of 32.2% over the same period of 2004. In volume terms, manufacturing exports continued to 
post the strongest growth, when comparing the first two months of 2005 with the same period of 2004. The robust 
performance of the trade balance contributed to the current account surplus of US$12.7 billion in the twelve months 
through March, equivalent to 2.1% of GDP. External demand, therefore, continues to contribute to the economic 
expansion. 
 
21. 
International capital market conditions have remained volatile since the last Copom meeting. In addition to 
the uncertainties regarding U.S. monetary policy, market instability has been driven by risk aversion in U.S. credit 
markets, due to difficulties faced by some large companies that could lead to portfolio reallocations unfavorable to 
emerging markets. As a consequence, Brazilian country risk was very volatile, posting the highest spreads in 
recent months. The real, after depreciating in mid-March, appreciated to February levels. As stressed in prior 
Copom Minutes, abundant international liquidity and market stability remain tied to macroeconomic conditions in 
the industrialized countries, especially the U.S., and to the Fed´s potential monetary policy response to economic 
developments. Despite the volatility of recent weeks, the Committee's members continue to assign a low probability 
to a significant deterioration in international financial markets driven by abrupt changes in the conduct of U.S. 
monetary policy. 
 
 
4

22. 
International oil prices have recently registered a slight decline, after reaching record highs at the end of 
March and beginning of April. Oil prices have continued to be driven by news related to demand conditions and 
available oil inventories in the main consumer countries, as well as possible supply restrictions among producing 
countries. Despite the slight decline observed since the last Copom meeting, international gasoline prices have 
remained above domestic prices. The persistence of prices at these levels remains surrounded by a considerable 
degree of uncertainty, such that the Committee maintained the assumption in its benchmark scenario that domestic 
fuel prices will not be upwardly adjusted in 2005. However, oil prices represent a bigger risk to the future inflation 
trajectory. Even if this recent uptick in international prices does not translate into an increase in domestic gasoline 
prices, it affects the prices of oil derivatives and market inflation expectations.   
 
23. 
Since the March meeting, the median of market expectations for 2005 IPCA inflation deteriorated to 6.10% 
from 5.77%. As mentioned in prior Copom Minutes, inflation expectations for 2005 remain high, despite favorable 
developments that could dampen inflationary pressures, such as signs of a deceleration in economic growth, the 
decline in wholesale industrial prices, the reassessment of market expectations for the exchange rate trajectory, 
and the more restrictive monetary stance.  
 
24. 
The marginal increase in 2005 inflation expectations, however, is mainly tied to higher-than-expected 
adjustments of some regulated prices, such as urban bus fares, to higher inflation expectations to April, and to less 
favorable external conditions. The impact of bad weather conditions on short-run food prices also contributed to 
higher inflation expectations for the year, although these effects tend to reverse as soon as normal agriculture 
supply conditions are reestablished. The expectations for twelve-month ahead inflation also deteriorated in the last 
weeks. However, these upward adjustments were of the same magnitude as those for second quarter inflation 
expectations, suggesting that the more restrictive monetary policy stance has prevented short-term inflationary 
pressures from contaminating longer forecast periods. The existence of well-anchored inflation expectations is 
strengthened by stable 2006 inflation forecasts. 
 
25. 
Under the benchmark scenario – which assumes the maintenance of the Selic rate at 19.25% p.a. and the 
exchange rate at R$/US$ 2.60 during the forecast period – projected inflation rose in comparison to the March 
meeting projection, standing above the 5.1% objective for the year. The deterioration was due to a range of factors, 
such as the revision of estimates for regulated price changes in 2005, which resulted mainly in an upward 
adjustment to April inflation estimates. The forecasts based on the market scenario – which incorporates the 
consensus exchange rate and Selic rate trajectories on the eve of the Copom meeting – exceeded the benchmark 
scenario forecast, and also rose relative to the previous month, due to the same reasons stated for the benchmark 
scenario. For 2006, the inflation forecasts declined, with the benchmark scenario forecast below the target 
established by the National Monetary Council (CMN) for the year, and the market scenario forecast above the 
target. The improvement in projections for 2006 reflects the longer time horizon for the consolidation of the effects 
of the monetary tightening process begun in September 2004. 
 
26. 
The Copom also analyzed inflation forecasts for the 12-month periods ending in March, June and 
September of 2006. The results for these periods will be more responsive to current monetary policy decisions than 
those of calendar year 2005, and the available inflation projections are more reliable than those for calendar year 
2006. The benchmark scenario forecast for the twelve-month period ending in March 2006 is above the value 
interpolated from the 5.1% inflation objective for 2005 and the 4.5% target for 2006. This forecast is also above the 
forecast made at the March meeting. On the other hand, the benchmark scenario forecasts for the twelve-month 
periods ending in June and September are below the inflation target path for these periods. The forecast for the 
twelve-month period ending in June is the same of that made at the March meeting, while the forecast for the 
twelve-month period ending in September is below the estimate made at that time. 
 
27. 
The Committee reaffirms that, as stated in the February and March Minutes, the effects of the monetary 
tightening begun last September are already influencing first quarter inflation results as well as future inflation 
expectations. Economic activity continues to expand, although at a slower pace and more in line with supply 
conditions, so that there are no significant pressures on inflation. However, as in the March meeting, the Copom 
identified some factors that heightened the risks to inflation convergence with the target path. These risks are 
associated with the persistence of some isolated pressures on current inflation and the deterioration in the external 
 
5

environment, given the persistence of high oil prices and the possibility of ongoing volatility in international capital 
markets. 
  
28. 
The Committee also reiterates that, under the inflation-targeting regime, its decision-making is oriented 
toward forecasted future inflation, analyzing alternative scenarios for the evolution of the main variables that affect 
price dynamics. The continuation of heightened risks to short-term inflation tends to increase the uncertainty 
regarding future inflation, so that both the monetary authority’s assessment of inflation dynamics and the 
coordination of private sector expectations are more difficult. In such circumstances, heightened uncertainty caused 
by factors that could reverse in the short term, could nevertheless have a more lasting effect on longer-term 
inflation expectations. Therefore, monetary policy should remain vigilant so that short-term pressures do not 
contaminate longer time horizons. 
  
29. 
Due to the short-term risks and their persistence in recent months, the Copom assessed that just 
maintaining rates for a sufficiently long time at the level established in the March meeting would not ensure inflation 
convergence to the target path. Thus, the Committee's members unanimously decided to increase the Selic rate 
target to 19.50% p.a., without bias, and closely follow the inflation outlook until the next meeting, to then define the 
next steps in the monetary policy strategy implemented since September. As highlighted in the March Copom 
Minutes, the monetary authority must remain ready to adapt the pace and magnitude of the interest rate adjustment 
process to the prevailing circumstances, in case of an exacerbation of the inflation risk factors. 
  
30. 
At the conclusion of the meeting, it was announced that the Copom will reconvene on May 17 for technical 
presentations, and on the following day to discuss the monetary policy decision, as established in Communiqué 
12,631 of October 29, 2004. 
 
6

SUMMARY OF DATA ANALYZED BY THE COPOM 
 
Economic Activity 
 
 
31. 
Seasonally adjusted retail sales fell 3.2% in February, month-on-month, according to the IBGE nationwide 
survey. Among all sectors included in the index, only furniture and appliance sales expanded in the period (0.7%). 
Autos, motorcycle and spare parts sales, which are not included in the general index, declined 4.8%. Despite the 
negative February result, sales increased in the first two months of the year, although showing signs of 
accommodation. Still under the effects of the high increase in December sales, the three-month moving average 
reached a record level in February and expanded 8.9% in the last twelve months.  
  
32. 
In March, data from the São Paulo Trade Association (ACSP) showed a 2.6% increase in the number of 
database consultations for credit sales and a 1.5% increase in consultations of the Usecheque system, both on a 
month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis. In the year through March, these indicators increased 6.3% and 4.0%, 
respectively, compared to the same period in 2004.  
  
33. 
The Fecomercio-SP survey showed a 3% month-on-month fall in the Consumer Confidence Index in April, 
attributable to a 4.1% decline in perceptions of current economic conditions and a 2.5% decline in consumer 
expectations.  
  
34. 
The Consumer Expectations National Index (INEC), calculated quarterly by the CNI in a nationwide survey, 
declined 2.2% in March, compared to December 2004, influenced by deterioration in expectations regarding the 
evolution of 2005 employment and inflation.  
  
35. 
Regarding seasonally adjusted investment indicators, the production of construction inputs, domestic 
capital goods production, and capital goods imports fell 1.3%, 3.1% and 6.9%, respectively, in February. Domestic 
capital goods output decelerated in the first two months of the year, due to the sharp fall in agricultural machinery 
production, in turn driven by the drop in orders from producers in the South because of the prolonged summer 
drought.     
  
36. 
The partial and preliminary release of the FGV quarterly industrial survey showed that entrepreneurs’ 
perceptions regarding the general business environment in April were similar to that observed in April 2004. 
Regarding expectations for the coming months, a slight decline was observed in expected demand. The production 
and industrial employment indicators continue to suggest a favorable outlook. However, compared to the January 
2005 survey, there was an increase in the number of respondents who considered current inventory levels to be 
excessive.   
  
37. 
According to the IBGE monthly industrial survey, industrial production fell 1.2% in February in month-on-
month seasonally adjusted terms. The decline was driven by the 1.1% contraction in manufacturing, while 
extractive mineral production remained virtually stable. Key drivers of the negative industrial activity results for 
February were the decline in the sugar-ethanol industry (a drop of 25.4% in sugar production and refining, and 
5.6% in ethanol production, seasonally adjusted) and the 4.6% contraction in oil refining. These results negatively 
influenced the monthly result and were caused by restrictions related to the production process, which should be 
overcome in the next month. 
 
38. 
Analysis of industrial production by activity reveals that the fall in February industrial output reflected 
declines in 11 of the 23 activities, and 3 of the 4 use categories, in seasonally adjusted terms. The most notable 
declines were in the sectors of pharmaceuticals, food, beverages, oil refining and ethanol production. Regarding 
the use categories, durable goods were the only category to record a positive performance in February, with an 
increase of 11.8% in the month-on-month seasonally adjusted series, mainly resulting from the positive growth 
rates observed in automotive production and cell phone production. Semi- and non-durable goods production 
declined 4.3% in February, after having reached a record peak in January.  
 
 
7

39. 
CNI manufacturing data showed an increase of 1% in real industrial sales and a decline of 0.2% in hours 
worked in February, on a month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis. Compared to the same month of 2004, real 
industrial sales and hours worked increased 5.9% and 7.2%, respectively. Installed capacity utilization reached 
81.9% in February, with a 0.3% decline in the month-on-month seasonally adjusted series, and an increase of 1.1% 
compared to the same month of 2004. 
 
40. 
Leading indicators for the industrial sector suggest some recovery in March compared to February. 
Particularly notable are the strong growth rates in automotive production, the highest level since January 1979, and 
the strong growth of corrugated cardboard shipments. 
 
Labor Market 
 
41. 
In February, formal employment rose 0.2% (seasonally adjusted, month-on-month) according to the 
Ministry of Labor and Employment. Compared to the same month of 2004, there was a 6.2% expansion in formal 
employment, with the creation of 1,473 thousand jobs, led by manufacturing.  
 
42. 
According to the IBGE survey in the six main metropolitan regions of the country, the unemployment rate 
reached 10.6% in February, versus 10.2% in January and 12% in February last year. The increase in 
unemployment was seasonal, with a 5.0% monthly increase in the number of unemployed individuals and a 0.3% 
decline in the number of employed individuals. The labor force, estimated at 21.7 million individuals, increased 
0.2% in February.  
 
43. 
In the industrial sector, according to the CNI indices seasonally adjusted by the BCB, employment rose 
0.2% and real payrolls were unchanged in February, on a month-on-month basis. Compared to the same month of 
2004, real payroll and employed workers grew 8.1% and 6.8%, respectively. 
 
Credit and Delinquency Rates 
 
44. 
Non-earmarked credit grew 2.1% in March. Credit operations with individuals increased 3.5%, driven 
mainly by the expansion in personal credit, as a result of the increase in payroll-deducted loans. Corporate credit 
with domestic funding expanded by 0.9%, while corporate credit with external funding increased 1.9%.  
 
45. 
The average interest rate on non-earmarked credit increased from 47.5% p.a. in February to 47.8% p.a. in 
March. The average corporate rate stood at 32.9% p.a., a 0.5 p.p. increase in the month. The average rate for 
credit to individuals was unchanged at 64.0% p.a.   
 
46. 
The default rate on non-earmarked credit (considering payments delinquent for 15 days or more) stood at 
12.7% in March, a 0.3 p.p. increase month-on-month. The corporate default rate rose to 3.8% in March from 3.7% 
in February. 
 
47. 
 The retail sales default rate measured by the ACSP declined to 6.4% in March, from 7.0% in February, 
roughly the same level of March last year (6.5%). The number of new negative registers rose 21.6%, while the 
number of cancelled registrations increased 23.2%. In the year to March, the average default rate stood at 6.0%, 
versus 6.1% in the first quarter of 2004. The number of returned checks, compared to the total number of checks, 
reached 6.3% in March, the highest rate ever.   
 
External Environment 
 
48. 
Global economic growth was robust in 2004, presenting the highest rate in the last fifteen years, driven by 
the United States and China. For 2005, the forecast is for lower, but sustained growth; however, projections point to 
less evenly distributed growth across countries. The United States and China will continue to lead the global 
expansion, whereas Japan and the Euro Area are expected to post more moderate growth. 
 
49. 
According to the International Monetary Fund, global trade grew 9.9% in 2004, and is forecasted to grow 
7.4% for 2005. For the World Trade Organization (WTO), global trade will expand 6.5% in 2005, compared to the 
 
8

9% increase last year. The International Institute of Finance (IIF) projects an increase in net capital flows to 
emerging markets, with a particular increase in foreign direct investment. However, there are some risks to this 
scenario, such as high oil prices, higher-than-expected interest rate increases, and a hard landing of the Chinese 
economy. 
 
50. 
Results thus far in 2005 have confirmed the multilateral organizations’ projections for the year. In the U.S., 
industrial production grew 0.3% in March, the same pace recorded in February. Installed capacity stood at 79.4%, 
an increase of 0.1 p.p. compared to February and the highest result since December 2000. U.S. business 
expectations, despite declining, continue to point to robust economic growth. The current level of the manufacturing 
ISM indicator is compatible with a 4.5% GDP growth rate, while the services indicator is compatible with a 5% GDP 
expansion. Regarding Japan, industrial production recorded a 2.3% decline in March, with business expectations 
(Tankan) declining, the same trend recorded in Germany, France and Italy.  
 
51. 
Despite the pressures from commodity price increases, especially metals and oil, there has not been an 
acceleration of inflation in the main economies, with consumer price indices remaining within the limits established 
by the monetary authorities.   
 
52. 
In the international financial markets, yields on 10-year U.S. Treasuries fell in late-March (after rising in 
late-January), with significant volatility in the period. The moves in U.S. Treasuries affected emerging market debt, 
which recorded volatility and relative deterioration at the beginning of April.     
 
Foreign Trade and Balance of Payments  
 
53. 
In March, the Brazilian trade balance posted record highs – on monthly, year-through-March accumulated, 
and twelve-month accumulated bases. In the month, the trade balance posted a US$3.3 billion surplus. Exports 
and imports rose 22.0% and 15.5%, respectively, compared to March 2004 daily averages, to reach US$9.3 billion 
and US$5.9 billion. In twelve months, the trade balance and total external trade reached US$35.9 billion and 
US$167.1 billion, respectively. In the first eleven working days of April, the trade balance totaled US$2.3 billion, 
with exports and imports growing by 42.0% and 12.2%, respectively, compared to April 2004 daily averages.  
 
54. 
in addition to the increase in export volumes, key export products have registered price increases. 
Furthermore, this increase has been accompanied by an increase in growth of typically low-participation items, 
underscoring the export diversification currently under way. In addition, it is important to highlight the broadening of 
export destinations, even to markets with low participation in Brazilian exports. 
 
55. 
Import growth in March and in the first quarter of 2005 was broadly disseminated, with notable increases in 
imports of fuel and lubricants (41.6%), capital goods (27.4%), non-durable consumer goods (26.6%), and raw-
material and intermediate goods (17.5%), compared to the daily averages of the same period of 2004.  
 
56. 
International reserves increased US$2.9 billion in March, to US$62.0 billion, while adjusted net reserves 
stood at US$39.5 billion, recording a US$4.7 billion increase compared to the same period of 2004.  
 
Money Market and Open Market Operations  
 
57. 
After the March Copom meeting, the yield curve shifted upward in response to the Committee decision, 
rising inflation expectations, and concerns regarding the external outlook. The upward shift was partially reversed, 
especially in the short end, by the release of both the March Copom Minutes and the IPCA-15 result. However, the 
subsequent release of higher-than-expected headline and core inflation results put pressure on future interest 
rates, while IBGE’s announcement of production and retail sales data put opposite pressure on rates. The volatility 
in the external outlook and the increase in risk-aversion also affected the long end of the yield curve. As a result, 
the increase of the yield curve between the March and April meetings was higher in the long end of the yield curve. 
Between March 16 and April 20, 1-month and 6-month interest rates increased by 0.39 p.p. and 0.48 p.p., 
respectively, while 1-year, 2-year and the 3-year rates increased by 0.58 p.p., 0.68 p.p. and 0.85 p.p., respectively. 
In the same period, the real interest rate measured by the ratio between the one-year nominal interest rate and the 
12-month-ahead inflation expectations reached 12.86% from 12.42%.  
 
9

58. 
The BCB did not rollover any FX instruments maturing since the March meeting. As a result, the net 
redemption of FX instruments, including interest payments, totaled US$224 million in April and US$14.7 billion in 
the first four months of the year. 
 
59. 
The National Treasury raised a total of R$21.9 billion via auctions of LTNs, maturing in October 2005, April 
2006, July 2006, and January 2007. The Treasury raised an additional R$500.5 million via five NTN-F auctions, 
with maturities in January 2008 and January 2010. The Treasury also conducted ten auctions of LFTs maturing in 
2007, 2008 and 2009, five of which were sales and five of which were exchanges. The five sales of LFTs totaled 
R$18.1 billion, and the five exchanges totaled R$2.1 billion.  
 
60. 
 Aimed at reducing excess liquidity projected for the next quarter, on March 23 the BCB sold LTNs 
maturing in July 2005 from its portfolio, and bought LTNs maturing in April 2005. Similarly, on April 6, April 13 and 
April 20 the BCB sold LTNs maturing in October 2005, and bought LTNs maturing in July 2005. These operations 
totaled R$5.1 billion. 
 
61. 
In its open market operations, the BCB intervened in the open market on a weekly basis with 3-month 
fixed-rate repo operations and 1-month floating-rate repo operations, and conducted daily liquidity management 
operations. The BCB also conducted twenty fixed-rate overnight repo operations, seven of which were overnight 
borrowings; three were borrowings with a two-to-five-working-day tenure; and ten of which were overnight lending. 
The excess liquidity sterilized from the banking reserves market via operations with tenors less than 30 days 
averaged R$19.2 billion, and the amount sterilized via operations with three-month tenors averaged R$39.9 billion.  
 
62. 
In March, net securitized domestic public debt grew 3.3%, due to the accrual of interest and the net 
placement of R$14.5 billion in securities. The dollar-linked share in net domestic debt fell to 4.9% in March from 
6.0% in February, mainly due to the net redemption of FX-linked securities and due to the reverse swap auctions in 
which the BCB assumed long FX position.  
 
10
