The members of the Monetary Policy Committee analyzed the recent performance of and prospects for the 
Brazilian and international economies under the monetary policy framework, which is designed to comply with the 
inflation targets established by the government. 
 
Recent Economic Developments 
  
1. 
In August, IPCA inflation continued to moderate and shift to a lower level than that registered at the 
beginning of the year. With the 0.17% increase in August, average monthly inflation for the June-August period was 
0.13%, versus 0.66% for the March-May period. The downward shift in inflation is partly attributable to the sharper 
than normal decline in food prices. Furthermore, the average change in all nine categories of the IPCA in the June-
August period was below that of the previous three-month period, with the exception of personal expenses and 
communications. Tradable goods prices fell in the period, due to ongoing exchange rate appreciation. Non-tradable 
goods price inflation was also significantly lower, at an average of 0.2% in the June-August period, from 0.5% in the 
previous three months. Additionally, the IPCA diffusion index fell to 48.4%, the lowest level since 1998, signaling 
that the reduction in inflation has been generalized across the economy.  
  
2. 
Core inflation measures declined, although less sharply than headline inflation. Core inflation by exclusion, 
smoothed trimmed-means, and non-smoothed trimmed-means core inflation all declined, to average 0.33%, 0.43%, 

2
individuals rose 3.4% in the year, over the same period of 2004. Average real incomes rose 2.3% relative to June, 
reflecting the decline in consumer price inflation and the gains obtained by workers in salary negotiations. 
measures of core inflation have recently shown decisive signs of accommodation to lower levels. Of note, three-
month moving average core inflation in August fell to the lowest level registered since the beginning of 2001.  
 
3. 
In August, the General Price Index (IGP-DI) fell 0.79%, the sharpest decline in four consecutive monthly 
declines. The Wholesale Price Index (IPA-DI) was again the main driver, dropping 1.04% in August, and 
accompanied by a 0.44% decline in the Consumer Price Index (IPC-DI) and virtually no change in the National 
Index of Civil Construction (INCC). The IGP-DI has risen only 0.32% in the year through August, while the IPA-DI 
has declined 1.57%. The uncharacteristic decline in the IPA-DI reflects the drop in the prices of consumer goods 
(despite the increase in consumer durables prices) and production inputs. The decline is also attributable to the 
rare confluence of a sharp decline in wholesale agricultural prices (–5.19% in the year) and a more modest decline 
in wholesale industrial prices (–0.33%). Preliminary indicators for September suggest that both the IGP-DI and the 
IPA-DI will continue to decline – IGP-M data for the first ten days of September (–0.56%) suggest the fifth 
consecutive, and largest, monthly decline in the index. For both year-to-date and 12-month trailing inflation, the 
general price indices have recorded lower inflation than the IPCA, suggesting a consistent reduction in wholesale 
prices, with favorable spillovers for consumer prices (and regulated prices) for next year. As emphasized in prior 
Copom Minutes, the intensity and continuity of this pass-through in the coming months will depend on demand 
conditions and price-setters’ expectations for the future inflation path.   
 
4. 
Economic activity rebounded in the second quarter of 2005, confirming the outlook articulated in the June 
Inflation Report. Quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted growth of 1.4% (the eighth consecutive quarter of growth) 
raised first half 2005 growth to 3.4% in year-on-year terms. Industry, agriculture, and services performed strongly, 
posting quarter-on-quarter growth of 3.0%, 1.1%, and 1.2%, respectively. The pick-up in activity was most visible in 
the components of domestic demand. There was a 4.5% expansion in gross fixed capital formation, after two 
quarters of declines, and a 0.9% increase in household consumption, after a contraction in the first quarter. Exports 
of goods and services rose 2.6%, the ninth consecutive quarter of growth, while imports rose 2.4%. The rebound in 
consumption and private investment strengthens expectations that, in the medium- and long-term, these 
components will continue to be the main drivers of economic growth. Of note, the Brazilian Institute of Geography 
and Statistics (IBGE) upwardly revised data for first quarter GDP to show quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted 
growth of 0.4% (above the initial 0.3% estimate). Leading indicators of economic activity suggest growth will 
continue in the coming quarters.  
  
5. 
Industrial production fell a month-on-month seasonally adjusted 2.5% in July, in line with leading and 
coincident indicators for the series. The magnitude of the drop likely reflected an atypical fewer working days in July 
(21) relative to June (22), due to moving holidays not considered in the seasonal adjustment methodology (Corpus 
Christi fell in May instead of June), and the occurrence of five weekends in July. The drop in industrial production 
occurred after four consecutive increases, and the overall tendency of the series suggests continued growth, with 
industrial production at generally high levels by historical standards. The smoother three-month moving average 
series registered the third consecutive month of growth and a new historic high in July, 4.1% above the value of 
July 2004. Leading and coincident indicators suggest industrial production will rebound in August, with continued 
growth in the three-month moving average series.  
  
6. 
All use categories of industrial production declined in the seasonally adjusted series, due to the calendar 
effects described above. Capital goods production posted the sharpest decline, down 7.6%, followed by 
intermediate and consumer goods, with contractions of 1.9% and 1.7%, respectively. In the year-to-date, the 
performance is positive, with capital goods production, intermediate goods, and consumer goods growing 2.6%, 
1.8%, and 8.2%, respectively. In addition, the three-month moving average series for capital goods, intermediate 
goods and consumer durable goods increased 0.4%, 0.1% and 2.1%, respectively, reaching, in all three cases, 
new historic highs. Consumer durable goods production has been the most dynamic in recent months, posting a 
sixth consecutive monthly increase in July, for an accumulated 12-month expansion of 19.2%.  
  
7. 
July labor market data remained strong, showing labor market trends evolving in step with the strong 
performance of economic activity. The unemployment rate measured by the IBGE was 9.4% in July, holding steady 
vis-à-vis June, and at the lowest level for the series as measured since October 2001. The number of employed 

3
remain tied to macroeconomic conditions in the industrialized countries, especially the United States, and to the 
Fed’s potential monetary policy response to economic developments. In general, recent indicators suggest a 
Manufacturing employment fell 0.2% in July, as measured by the National Industry Confederation (CNI) and 
seasonally adjusted by the BCB, after rising steadily throughout the year, but nevertheless accumulating a year-to-
date increase of 6.0% and a twelve-month rise of 6.1%. Real manufacturing payrolls rose 0.8% in July, for a 
cumulative year-to-date increase of 9.0% and a twelve-month increase of 9.7%, exceeding employment growth and 
signaling an increase in the average salary. Labor market indicators suggest that the increase in the quantity of 
jobs is being accompanied by an improvement in the quality of industrial employment. Formal employment, 
measured by the Ministry of Labor and Employment also continued to rise, with the creation of 117,473 positions in 
July, for year-to-date job creation of just over 1 million positions, and cumulative twelve-month job creation of 1.3 
million positions. 
 
8. 
As described in the August Copom Minutes, retail sales rose 1.2% in June, according to seasonally 
adjusted data from the IBGE, for a year-to-date expansion of 4.6%, driven by favorable labor market and credit 
conditions. As in prior months, and in line with the recent performance of industrial production, growth was driven 
by furniture and household appliance sales, which rose 4.3% in June, versus May. IBGE also upwardly revised its 
retail sales data for May, showing a much stronger growth of 1.2% (versus 0.4% in the initial report), seasonally 
adjusted. As a result, the three-month moving average series showed growth of 0.9% in June, relative to May. With 
the May data revision, all retail sectors posted two consecutive months of growth, with the exception of fabric, 
clothing, and shoes. Of note, hyper- and supermarket sales in May were upwardly revised, from a contraction of 
0.4% to an increase of 0.7%. Despite the lack of more current retail sales data, available indicators suggest that 
July performance will be similar to that of June. In addition, retail sales are expected to gain momentum in the 
coming months, despite the fact that, in September, the consumer confidence index measured by the São Paulo 
Retail Trade Association (Fecomercio-SP) declined for the second consecutive month and reached the lowest level 
since April 2004. 
  
9. 
Installed capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector, as measured by the CNI and seasonally adjusted 
by the BCB, fell to 81.8% in July, from 82.7% in June. Quarterly data from the Getúlio Vargas Foundation (FGV), 
seasonally adjusted by the BCB, shows that capacity utilization reached 84.7% in July, a slight increase from the 
84.2% registered in the previous reading, in April. Both series show that capacity utilization remains at high levels 
by historical standards. The relative stability of the index seems to be associated with the maturation of 
investments, given that industrial production rose in the period. The persistence of historically high levels of 
installed capacity utilization makes the inflation path more dependent on the capacity of current and prospective 
supply increases to meet demand conditions. With regard to investment, capital goods absorption fell 5.5% in July, 
affected by the number of working days in the month, but registered an expansion of 3.8% in the year-to-date. The 
less volatile quarterly series for gross fixed capital formation rose 4.5% in the second quarter of the year, quarter-
on-quarter, accumulating an 8.6% increase in the last four quarters, versus a 4.3% increase in GDP in the same 
period. The 28.3% increase in capital goods imports in the year through July also bodes well for the investment 
outlook. 
  
10. 
The most recent external accounts data provide further evidence that the external sector will outperform 
this year. The trade balance in the twelve months through August exceeded US$ 40 billion, with exports reaching 
US$ 111 billion (up 25%) and imports at US$ 71 billion (up 23.9%), for total external trade of US$ 182 billion. Both 
exports and imports decelerated slightly at the margin. In contrast, capital goods imports rose 41.3% in August, 
versus August 2004, and 24% in the last twelve months, the highest growth rate since March 1998. The strong 
performance of the trade accounts in the twelve months through August underpinned the current account surplus of 
US$ 12.5 billion, equivalent to 1.8% of GDP. While the contribution of external demand to economic growth has 
diminished somewhat, it remains positive and above that expected at the beginning of the year.  
 
11. 
International financial market volatility remained elevated, and the scenario considered by the Committee at 
its August meeting remained relatively unchanged. A detailed evaluation of the potential effects of Hurricane 
Katrina on the global economy appears premature, despite growing expectations for at least a temporary effect on 
the U.S. economy. In early August, Brazilian country risk fell close to the historic lows reached in October 1997. As 
could be expected in a large emerging market economy with a floating exchange rate, the reduction in Brazilian 
country risk was accompanied by exchange rate appreciation. Liquidity conditions and financial market stability 

4
a more favorable longer-term macroeconomic environment.  
  
favorable outlook, in the sense that the Fed will continue to raise interest rates at a measured pace. An additional 
point of concern is the current account imbalances in some of the largest economies, and the possibility that 
eventual adjustments will result in significant currency movements. Despite these concerns, about which there is a 
significant degree of uncertainty, the Copom continues to assign a low probability to a significant deterioration in 
international financial markets.  
 
12. 
After reaching record highs in August, international oil prices fell slightly in September. Despite this 
reduction, prices remain at elevated levels. As emphasized in the August Copom Minutes, a key concern is that oil 
prices could remain at higher-than-expected levels for an extended period of time. The August Minutes also 
highlighted the possibility that recent oil price behavior could reduce the plausibility of the Copom’s baseline oil 
price scenario, with an increasingly high likelihood of increases in domestic gasoline prices in 2005. This possibility 
was realized in early-September, with the increase in domestic fuel prices. While international oil prices continue to 
represent a risk to the future inflation path via the effects on oil-intensive products, as well as private sector inflation 
expectations, the recent increase in domestic fuel prices should alleviate pressures on future inflation. The 
Committee’s baseline scenario assumes that there will be no further increases in domestic gasoline prices in 2005. 
 
Assessment of Inflation Trends 
 
13. 
The inflation shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information. The 
scenario considered in the simulations utilized the following assumptions: 
 
a) The projection for the adjustment of gasoline prices for 2005 rose to 7.5% from 0%. The projection for 
the prices of bottled gas was reduced to –1.7% from 0%; 
 
b) The projection for fixed line telephone rate adjustments in 2005 was raised 0.6 p.p. to 6.7%. The 
projection for household electricity rate adjustments was reduced to 7.6% from 8.2%;  
 
c) For all regulated prices, which represented a total weight of 29.8% in the August IPCA, the Copom 
raised its projection for 2005 adjustments to 7.8% from 7.0%; 
 
d) The projection for regulated price adjustments in 2006 was lowered to 5.3% from 5.7%. The reduction 
was due to the sharp drop in the IGPs and their twelve-month ahead projections. The increase in available 
information since the last Copom meeting enabled the individual projection of a larger number of regulated 
price changes for 2006. For the remaining items, the projection continued to follow the model of 
endogenous determination, which takes into account seasonal components, the exchange rate, market 
price inflation, and the change in the IGP;  
 
e) The projection for the six-month spread over the Selic rate, using a VAR model based on the Selic and 
swap rates on the eve of the Copom meeting, increases from an average of –90bps in the third quarter of 
2005, to 34 bps in the fourth quarter of 2006. 
  
14. 
Regarding fiscal policy, it is assumed that the consolidated public sector primary surplus target of 4.25% of 
GDP for 2005 and 2006 will be achieved. The related assumptions considered in the August meeting were 
maintained.  
 
15. 
Since the August meeting, median IPCA inflation expectations for 2005 declined to 5.19% from 5.40%. 
Inflation expectations may be susceptible to some upward revision, as they have only partially captured the recent 
increase in domestic fuel prices. However, it bears emphasizing that inflation expectations fell for the fourth 
consecutive month in September, in part due to the larger than expected decline in the IPCA in August, and moved 
increasingly in line with the 5.1% inflation objective for 2005. Expectations for 2006 IPCA inflation fell to 4.80% from 
4.98%. In addition, the distribution of the projections has moved toward a mode that is closer to the 4.5% target 
established by the CMN (National Monetary Council) for the year. These developments suggest that the recent 
monetary policy stance has both contained short-term inflationary pressures and contributed to the consolidation of 

5
technical presentations, and on the following day to discuss the monetary policy decision, as established in 
Communiqué 12,631 of October 29, 2004.  
16. 
The 2005 inflation forecast under the benchmark scenario – which assumes the maintenance of the Selic 
rate at 19.75% p.a. and the exchange rate at R$/US$ 2.35 during the forecast period – declined relative to the 
August Copom meeting, falling below the 5.1% inflation objective for the year. The improvement was due primarily 
to the lower-than-expected inflation result for August, the widening of the output gap, and the downward revision of 
some regulated price adjustment forecasts for the year, which counterbalanced the adverse effect of the increase 
in gasoline prices. The forecasts based on the market scenario – which incorporates the consensus exchange rate 
and Selic rate trajectories on the eve of the Copom meeting – were above the 5.1% objective, but declined relative 
to August. For 2006, the benchmark scenario forecast declined and remained below the target established by the 
CMN. The forecast under the market scenario fell slightly, but remained above the target. 
 
17. 
The Committee also analyzed inflation forecasts for the twelve-month periods ending in March, June, and 
September 2006. The forecasts for these periods will be more responsive to current monetary policy decisions than 
those for calendar year 2005, and also more reliable than those for calendar year 2006. The forecasts under the 
benchmark scenario for these periods were below the target inflation path values interpolated from the 5.1% 
objective for 2005 and the 4.5% target for 2006. 
 
Monetary Policy Decision 
 
18. 
The Copom reaffirms the view that actual and expected inflation results demonstrate that the monetary 
tightening cycle begun in September 2004 has contained short-term inflationary pressures and consolidated a 
more favorable long-term macroeconomic environment. Economic activity continues to expand, but at a pace more 
compatible with supply conditions, such that it will not exert significant inflationary pressure. In addition, the external 
scenario remains favorable, particularly with regard to external financing conditions for the country. While 
international oil prices have remained at elevated levels in recent months, the recent adjustment of domestic 
gasoline prices eliminated a key point of uncertainty for the inflation outlook for 2005 and especially 2006. There 
are, therefore, more definite signs of a benign inflationary environment. As in the August meeting, the Copom 
emphasizes that the main challenge for monetary policy is to now ensure consolidation of the favorable 
developments anticipated for the future. 
 
19. 
In an inflation-targeting regime, the monetary authority assesses alternative scenarios for the evolution of 
the principal variables that shape price dynamics, in order to orient its decision-making process. The recent 
consolidation of favorable inflation dynamics should significantly reduce uncertainties regarding future inflation, and 
make it easier for the monetary authority to evaluate potential scenarios and coordinate private sector expectations. 
Furthermore, the persistence of a tighter monetary policy stance should help to bring inflation in line with short-term 
objectives, in an environment in which activity indicators have demonstrated consistent strength and short-term 
inflation results owe to specific factors that may reverse in the future. Such a policy should have more lasting 
effects on longer-term inflation expectations, thereby significantly reducing the costs associated with the monetary 
authority’s efforts to bring inflation in line with the target path.  
 
20. 
The uninterrupted convergence of inflation to the target path and the resulting consolidation of a more 
robust environment for macroeconomic stability will contribute to the progressive reduction in perceived 
macroeconomic risk, a process already underway for several years in Brazil. The scope for a reduction in real 
interest rates in the future will naturally follow. The Copom believes that its cautious monetary policy stance has 
been critical in increasing the probability of inflation convergence to the target path. For this to materialize, 
however, it is important that forward-looking inflation indicators remain compatible with the more recent, benign 
inflation outlook. The easing of monetary policy will not compromise the important achievements made in recent 
months in lowering inflation and preserving economic growth with job creation. 
 
21. 
The Copom therefore unanimously decided to reduce the Selic target to 19.50% p.a., without bias, and 
closely follow the evolution of the inflation outlook until the next meeting, at which time it will define the next steps in 
its monetary policy strategy. 
 
22. 
At the conclusion of the meeting, it was announced that the Copom would reconvene on October 18 for 

6
32. 
Investment indicators declined in July. Domestic production and imports of capital goods fell 7.6% and 
1.6%, respectively, on a month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis. Construction input production fell 3.5%. In the 
SUMMARY OF DATA ANALYZED BY THE COPOM 
 
Inflation 
 
23. 
The IPCA rose 0.17% in August, bringing year-to-date inflation to 3.59% and twelve-month trailing inflation 
to 6.02%. The August result was driven solely by the increase in regulated prices, which rose 0.69%. Market prices 
fell 0.05%, with notable declines in food and beverage prices (–0.73%) outweighing other price increases.  
  
24. 
The General Price Index (IGP-DI) fell 0.79% in August, the fourth consecutive monthly decline. With the 
August result, year-to-date IGP-DI inflation was 0.32%, and twelve-month trailing inflation was 2.71%. The 
Wholesale Price Index (IPA-DI), the sub-index with the largest weight in the IGP-DI, declined for the fourth 
consecutive month, posting –1.04% and bringing the year-to-date result to –1.57% and the twelve-month trailing 
result to an increase of 1.16%. The Consumer Price Index-Brasil (IPC-Br) fell 0.44% in the month, driven by the 
1.57% decline in food prices, while the National Index of Civil Construction (INCC) rose 0.02%. 
 
25. 
The drop in the IPA-DI in August reflected a decline in both agricultural and industrial prices. Agricultural 
wholesale prices fell 2.47% (–1.60% in July), due mainly to the sharp decline in prices of animal and animal 
derivative products, as well as the decline in prices of legumes, fruits, cereals, and grains, which had posted a 
modest increase in July. The drop in industrial prices was stronger in August, down 0.57% versus -0.38% in July. 
The result was primarily due to the drop in chemical prices (–0.67%), after rising in the prior month (0.26%). 
Meanwhile, other important manufactured products, such as foodstuffs and metals, continued to register price 
declines. The IPA-DI by production stage showed a 1.22% decline in final goods prices and a 0.81% decline in 
intermediate goods prices, contractions that outpaced the declines of July. The prices of raw materials fell 1.26% in 
August, following a 1.70% decline in July.  
 
26. 
Smoothed trimmed-means core IPCA inflation fell to 0.36% in August, from 0.45% in July, for a twelve-
month trailing increase of 7.20%. Non-smoothed trimmed-means core IPCA rose 0.28% in August, versus 0.31% in 
July, for a twelve-month trailing increase of 5.82%. Core inflation calculated by the exclusion of household food and 
regulated prices fell in August to 0.26%, from 0.37% in July, with a twelve-month cumulative increase of 6.56%.   
 
27. 
The IPCA diffusion index (measuring the number of items in the IPCA registering price increases) dropped 
to 48.4% in August, from 53.7% in July. 
 
28. 
IPC-Br core inflation, calculated by the Getúlio Vargas Foundation (FGV) under the symmetric trimmed 
means method, reached 0.07% in August, the lowest monthly result since November 1998. Year-to-date through 
August, IPC-Br inflation was 3.69%, with a trailing twelve-month increase of 5.46%. 
 
29. 
Inflation is expected to accelerate in September due to the fuel price increase implemented on September 
10. The impact of the gasoline price adjustment on IPCA inflation is projected at 0.32 p.p., divided between the 
months of September and October.  
 
Economic Activity 
  
30. 
São Paulo Trade Association (ACSP) data showed a seasonally adjusted 1.1% increase in database 
consultations for credit sales in August, compared to July, while the number of consultations of the Usecheque 
system fell 1.9%. In the year through August, these indicators rose 5.7% and 3.5%, respectively, compared to the 
same period of the previous year.  
  
31. 
The monthly Fecomercio-SP survey showed a 13.1% month-on-month drop in the Consumer Confidence 
Index in September, due to a 13.4% drop in consumer expectations and a 12.7% decline in perceptions of current 
economic conditions.  
  

year through July, compared to the same period of 2004, these indicators registered expansion of 2.6%, 28.3%, 
and 3.8%, respectively. 
  
33. 
According to the IBGE’s Monthly Industrial Survey (PIM), industrial production contracted a month-on-
month seasonally adjusted 2.5% in July, after expanding for four consecutive months. This contraction partially 
reflected the timing of the Corpus Christi holiday, which fell in May this year instead of June. This effect is not 
addressed by the seasonal adjustment method used for the PIM and resulted in a higher base comparison for 
June. Manufacturing output contracted 1.9%, while mining fell 1.1%. In the year through July, industrial production 
rose 4.3%, due to the 4.0% increase in manufacturing and the 10.5% increase in mining. 
  
34. 
Seasonally adjusted data for industrial production showed that 20 of the 23 sectors surveyed declined in 
the month. All use categories contracted in July, with particularly sharp declines for capital goods production (–
7.6%) and consumer durable goods production (–5.9%). The production of intermediate goods, with the largest 
weight in the industrial production index, fell 1.9%, while semi- and non-durable consumer goods fell 0.8%. 
 
35. 
CNI manufacturing data showed declines of 0.3% and 2.2% in real sales and hours worked in July, 
respectively, on a month-on-month seasonally adjusted basis. Compared to the same month of 2004, real sales fell 
2.9%, while hours worked increased 2.8%. Installed capacity utilization reached a seasonally adjusted 81.8% in 
July, declining 0.9 p.p. relative to June, though the seasonally adjusted data was also affected by the Corpus 
Christi holiday effect.   
 
36. 
Seasonally adjusted leading industrial activity indicators (energy consumption, automobile production, and 
heavy vehicle tolls paid) suggest a rebound of industrial activity in August.     
 
Labor Market 
 
37. 
The formal employment index rose 0.4% in July (month-on-month, seasonally adjusted), according to the 
Ministry of Labor and Employment. Compared to July 2004, there was a 5.6% increase in formal employment, with 
a net creation of almost 1.4 million jobs, mainly in commerce (7.5% increase).   
 
38. 
According to the IBGE survey in the six main metropolitan regions of the country, the unemployment rate 
remained unchanged at 9.4% in July, 1.8 p.p. below the July 2004 rate. The month-on-month stability in July 
reflected unchanged labor force and employed workers. Real average earnings, at R$967, posted a 2.3% increase 
in July, month-on-month.  
 
39. 
According to CNI indicators seasonally adjusted by the BCB, industrial employment fell 0.2% and real 
payrolls increased 0.8% in July, month-on-month, and rose 3.9% and 9.3%, respectively, relative to July 2004. 
 
Credit and Delinquency Rates 
 
40. 
Non-earmarked credit grew 1.6% in August (month-on-month). Credit operations with individuals rose 
3.4%, driven mainly by the expansion of personal credit and credit for the acquisition of goods. Corporate credit 
with domestic funding increased 0.6%, while externally funded operations dropped 0.9%.  
 
41. 
The average interest rate on non-earmarked credit increased 0.3 p.p. in August. The average rate on 
personal credit operations remained unchanged at 64.4% p.a., while the average rate on corporate credit increased 
0.2 p.p., to 33.2% p.a.  
 
42. 
Delinquency rates for non-earmarked credit (loans in arrears for more than fifteen days) rose 0.1 p.p. in 
August, to 7.6%. Delinquency rates for credit operations with individuals increased to 12.4% in August, from 12.0% 
in July. Delinquencies in corporate credit operations increased to 3.6% in August, from 3.5% in July.  
 
 
7

8
 
50. 
At the end of August, international reserves totaled US$ 55.1 billion, an increase of US$ 388 million in the 
month. Net adjusted reserves reached US$ 40.4 billion, down US$ 48 million in the month. 
43. 
Net delinquency rates for retail credit, measured by the ACSP, increased to 4.7% in August, from 4.2% in 
July, due to the expansions of 4.8% and 8.3% in the number of cancelled registers and in the number of new 
registers in the month, respectively.  
 
External Environment 
 
44. 
Recent indicators show sustained global economic growth, although slightly uneven, when compared to 
2004. U.S. GDP grew 3.3% on an annualized basis in the second quarter, according to the revised data. The sharp 
contraction in inventories suggests a favorable outlook for the third quarter. Japan and the Euro Area show mild 
growth. Expectations for Japanese economic growth have improved, since the increase in domestic consumption 
plays an important role in the sustainability of economic growth. The main risks to sustained global economic 
growth are high oil prices, the impact of which is already being felt on consumer expectations in the main 
economies, and a reversion in real estate prices. Although the main indicators of U.S. real estate prices remain 
high, they have shown a downward trend, as mentioned in the last Beige Book. 
 
45. 
The damage caused by Hurricane Katrina at the end of August introduced uncertainty into the economic 
outlook. Although the effects of such catastrophes on the overall economy tend be relatively muted, the region 
most affected is responsible for the bulk of oil extraction, refining and distribution in the U.S. Consequently, the 
supply contraction introduced additional pressure on oil prices, which may translate into inflationary pressures and 
reduced disposable income and consumer confidence. The potential for the FOMC to interrupt its monetary 
tightening cycle, to compensate for Hurricane Katrina’s likely impact on economic activity, contributed to sharp 
declines in the U.S. yield curve and in emerging market bond spreads. However, in early September, oil prices 
declined and the U.S. yield curve returned to previous levels. If economic trends prevailing prior to Hurricane 
Katrina are maintained, it is more likely that the U.S. will continue to tighten monetary policy at a measured pace. 
 
Foreign trade and international reserves 
 
46. 
Results for the external trade accounts confirmed the sustainability of strong external position observed 
recently, with practically all measures of external trade exceeding historical highs. Year-to-date, the trade surplus 
reached US$ 28.3 billion and, in the twelve months through August, reached US$ 40.1 billion, growing 29.4% and 
28.6%, respectively, over the previous period. Total external trade reached US$ 123.8 billion and US$ 182.3 billion 
for the same periods, for growth of 22.8% and 26.1%. In the first six working days of September, the trade balance 
reached US$ 1.4 billion, with export growth of 15.2% and an import contraction of 5.3%, over the average daily 
levels reached in September 2004.  
 
47. 
Exports reached US$ 11.3 billion in August, a record level. Average daily exports rose 19.9% compared to 
August 2004. Manufactured exports, totaling US$ 6 billion, reached a record high for the month, both in terms of 
price and range of items exported. Of note, were increases in exports of radio transmitters, refined sugar, metal 
laminates, transport equipment, airplanes, auto parts, tractors, passenger cars, and gasoline. Sales of raw 
materials and semi-manufactured goods also reached record levels in August. The rise of 23.8% in raw material 
exports was due, primarily, to the 88.9% increase in crude oil exports. Coffee bean, meat, and iron ore exports also 
posted above average growth.  
 
48. 
In the year through August, manufactured goods rose to represent 54.7% of total exports, up from 52.9% in 
the same period of 2004. In addition to ongoing export product diversification, there has also been export market 
diversification, with notable growth in exports to new markets.  
 
49. 
For the first time, imports breached the US$ 7 billion mark, reaching US$ 7.7 billion, up 30.6% in daily 
average terms, compared to August 2004. All import categories increased in the month, over the same month of 
the previous year. In the year through August, there was a 28.8% increase in capital goods imports, 21.8% for fuel 
and lubricants, 20.3% for consumer goods, and 18.1% for raw materials and intermediate goods, all measured in 
daily averages compared to the same period last year. 

Money Market and Open Market Operations  
 
51. 
In the period following the August Copom meeting, the yield curve shifted downward, mainly due to 
uncertainties regarding the domestic outlook. At the beginning of September, rates trended downward, on the back 
of the drop in actual and expected inflation and the release of weaker-than-expected July industrial production 
data. The reductions in oil prices, country risk, and the exchange rate appreciation were also supportive. Between 
August 17 and September 14, one-, three-, and six-month and one-year interest rates fell 0.11 p.p., 0.10 p.p., 0.01 
p.p. and 0.05 p.p., respectively. Meanwhile, two- and three-year interest rates fell more sharply, by 0.39 p.p., and 
0.55 p.p., respectively. Real interest rates measured by the differential between the one-year forward nominal 
interest rate and twelve-month ahead inflation expectations remained relatively stable, at 12.53% (versus 12.54%). 
 
52. 
From August 18 to September 14, there was no issuance or redemption of exchange rate-linked debt 
instruments, such that the net redemption of these instruments in the year held steady at US$ 15.1 billion. 
 
53. 
Since the August meeting, the National Treasury raised a total of R$16.2 billion via fixed-rate securities 
issuance: R$15.8 billion via issuance of LTNs maturing in 2006, 2007, and 2008; and R$388.4 million via issuance 
of NTN-Fs maturing in 2010 and 2012. Issuance of floating-rate LFTs, with maturities in 2008 and 2009, totaled 
R$7.7 billion. 
 
54. 
In its open market operations, the BCB conducted four weekly three-month fixed rate repo operations, as 
well as shorter-term repo operations (nine of which were overnight lendings, and five of which were overnight 
borrowings). The BCB also conducted daily liquidity management operations. The excess liquidity sterilized from 
the banking reserves market via operations with tenors of three months averaged R$46.4 billion. Operations with 
tenors less than thirty days averaged R$1.3 billion. 
 
55. 
Aimed at reducing excess liquidity projected for the fourth quarter, the BCB purchased LTNs maturing in 
October, selling in exchange LTNs maturing in January 2006 from its portfolio. These operations totaled R$6.5 
billion. 
 
56. 
In August, net securitized public sector debt increased 0.6%, to R$921 billion. Net redemptions totaling 
R$7.8 billion partially compensated accrued interest. The fixed-rate share of net domestic debt rose to 23.9% from 
22.4% in July. 
 
9
