 
A) Update of economic outlook and Copom’s scenario1 
1. Since the previous meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (Copom), the global 
environment has deteriorated. The episodes involving banks in the United States and 
Europe have increased the uncertainty and the volatility in markets and require 
monitoring. Major economies have emphasized the principle of separation of objectives 
and instruments in the conduct of monetary and macroprudential policies. 
2. At the same time, recent data on global activity and inflation remain resilient and the 
process of monetary policy tightening in major economies continues to advance. The 
external environment continues to be marked by the prospect of global growth below 
potential, but the easing of the Covid policy in China, a milder winter in Europe and the 
possibility of a gradual US growth slowdown soften the ongoing global economic 
slowdown resulting from the tightening of financial conditions in the major economies. 
Conversely, the impact on financial conditions and consequently on global growth of 
the recent episodes involving the banking system in major economies is still uncertain 
but has a negative bias. Recent inflation readings point to some stabilization of core 
inflation in several countries at levels above their targets and reinforce the inertial 
nature of the current inflationary process. The inflationary environment remains 
challenging and the low degree of labor market slack in some economies, coupled with 
persistently high current inflation with a high degree of diffusion, suggests that 
inflationary pressures, particularly in the services sector, should last longer. 
3. The process of normalization of monetary policy continues towards contractionary 
rates synchronized across countries. In several emerging economies, tightening cycles 
come to a halt or suggest they are nearing an end. In any case, most monetary 
authorities signal a prolonged period of high interest rates is necessary to fight 
inflationary pressures, which calls for greater caution in the conduct of economic 
policies also by emerging countries. 
4. Turning to the Brazilian economy, the set of indicators released since the previous 
meeting still corroborates the scenario of slowdown in the growth expected by the 
Committee. A moderation is observed in the coincident indicators of activity and the 
credit market has also shown deceleration at the margin. The labor market, which 
surprised positively throughout 2022, continues to show signs of moderation, with 
relative stability in the unemployment rate, stemming from declines in the employed 
population and in the workforce. 
5. Consumer inflation remains high. The inflation of the components more sensitive to 
the economic cycle and the monetary policy, which present greater inflationary inertia, 
remain above the range compatible with meeting the inflation target. Inflation 
expectations for 2023 and 2024 collected by the Focus survey are around 6.0% and 
4.1%, respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
6. In the reference scenario, the interest rate path is extracted from the Focus survey, 
and the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 5.252 and evolves according to the purchasing 
power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the 
futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year 
onwards. Moreover, the energy flag is assumed to be “yellow” in December 2023 and 
2024. In this scenario, Copom’s inflation projections stand at 5.8% for 2023 and 3.6% 
for 2024. Inflation projections for administered prices are 10.2% for 2023 and 5.3% for 
2024. The Committee decided again to emphasize the six-quarter horizon ahead. On 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into account changes that occurred since the February 
Copom meeting (252nd meeting). 
2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding the average USD/BRL exchange rate observed 
on the five business days ending on the last day of the week before the Copom meeting. 

 
this horizon, which refers to the third quarter of 2024, the 12-month inflation projection 
stands at 3.8%. The Committee judges that the uncertainty in its assumptions and 
projections is higher than usual. 
7. The Committee analyzed an alternative scenario with stable interest rates over the 
entire relevant horizon. In this scenario, inflation projections stand at 5.7% for 2023, 
3.3% for the third quarter of 2024, and 3.0% for 2024.  
8. The Committee again assessed the possibility of incorporating some increase in its 
estimate for the neutral interest rate, towards the movement observed in expectations 
for longer terms extracted from the Focus survey. The real neutral interest rate is the 
rate in which, in the absence of impact from other factors, the inflation rate remains 
stable, and the output grows according to its potential, reflecting productivity gains and 
changes in the structural fundamentals of the economy.  At this point, the Committee 
decided to keep the neutral interest rate at 4% but evaluated alternative scenarios and 
identified that the impacts of an increase in the neutral rate on its projections grow over 
time and become more relevant as of the second half of 2024.  
9. In assessing the factors that could lead to unfold an alternative scenario 
characterized by a higher neutral interest rate, emphasis was placed on the possible 
adoption of expansionary parafiscal policies, which can increase the neutral rate and 
reduce the power of monetary policy, as previously remarked by the Committee.  
10. The Committee continues to assess that the global disinflation process, especially 
regarding underlying inflation indicators, is challenging and may be slower than what is 
usually observed, as inflation is widespread in the services segment. In this context, the 
reduction of inflationary pressures continues to require the commitment and 
determination of central banks with the control of inflation through a more prolonged 
tightening of financial conditions. Such determination, with a likely impact upon asset 
prices in the short term, contributes to a more credible and lasting global disinflationary 
process.  
11. Since the previous Copom meeting, some regional banks were liquidated in the US 
and two large Swiss banks were merged, raising concerns about the banking system in 
the major economies. The Committee will continue to closely monitor this situation, 
analyzing possible contagion channels, but assesses that the direct impact on the 
domestic financial system and other emerging countries is, so far, limited, with no 
changes in the stability or efficiency of those financial systems.  
12. The scenario, therefore, looks even more challenging for the conduct of monetary 
policy, with increased risks both around the inflationary scenario and in relation to 
financial stability. On the one hand, there are the episodes involving the banking sector 
and the consequent need to provide liquidity. On the other hand, global growth and 
inflation data remain resilient, requiring commitment and determination from the 
monetary authorities. The Committee believes that the best contribution of monetary 
policy continues to be in combating inflationary pressures and smoothing out economic 
fluctuations. In addition, some members emphasized that they do not see a dilemma in 
the conduct of monetary policy between its objective of inflation control and the 
objective of financial stability.  The Committee stressed how the two objectives have 
specific instruments. 
13. Brazilian activity data continue to indicate a more moderate pace of growth at the 
margin, and employment data suggest moderation. It was pointed out that after a 
period of strong recovery in the last two years, a process of deceleration of growth has 
begun in the durable goods sector, which had been particularly buoyant in the 
pandemic, and which is more sensitive to interest rate policy.  The deceleration spread 
to the non-durable goods sector and, subsequently, to the services sector, although in 
a milder way. Copom continues to evaluate that the economic slowdown underway is 
necessary to guarantee the convergence of inflation to its targets, particularly after a 
prolonged period of inflation above the target. Finally, it was noted that the economic 

 
growth outlook has not changed significantly in the recent period. 
14. As expected, given the greater lag in relation to the economic cycle, only recently 
has the labor market shown evidence of a moderate slowdown, compatible with the 
Committee's expectation of a moderation in the pace of economic activity. Some 
members have observed that there is a movement towards a partial recomposition of 
recent losses in real wages. This movement is expected and has been accompanied by 
a deceleration in nominal gains, which is expected to intensify ahead.   
15. The Committee believes that the disinflation dynamics continues to be 
characterized by a process with two distinct stages. In the first stage, already 
completed, there is a greater speed of disinflation, with a greater effect on 
administered prices and an indirect effect on market prices through less inertia. In the 
second stage, which is currently observed, the speed of disinflation is slower and core 
inflation – which is more affected by the aggregate demand and the interest rate policy 
– is reduced at a slower pace, responding to the output gap and inflation expectations. 
It is thus observed an inflationary dynamic driven by excess demand initially in goods, 
and which has currently shifted to the services sector, and which therefore requires 
moderation of economic activity for monetary policy channels to act. Such a process 
demands serenity and patience in the conduct of monetary policy for the convergence 
of inflation to its targets.  
16. The further deterioration of inflation expectations in the Focus survey, especially at 
longer maturities, was much debated. It has been pointed out that the behavior of 
expectations is a fundamental aspect of the inflationary process since it affects the 
setting of present and future prices and wages. As higher inflation is projected ahead, 
companies and workers start to incorporate such future inflation in the adjustments of 
prices and wages. Thus, there is a greater rise in prices in the current period, and the 
inflationary process is fed by these expectations. It was also highlighted that the 
anchoring of expectations is a key factor for price stability. Therefore, and following the 
best international practice, the Committee incorporates expectations in its decision-
making process, analyzing and including them as one of the factors affecting its 
inflation projections.  
17. Additional tightening of credit conditions was observed in some modalities. Some 
members believe that this movement is in line with what is expected, considering the 
interest rates rise undertaken until the middle of the second half of 2022. For these 
members, an increase in delinquency and a slowdown in credit granting should still be 
expected, but in line with what was observed in previous monetary policy tightening 
cycles. Other members, in contrast, assess that in the most recent period the tightening 
of credit granting was more intense than expected, but focused on some specific 
markets. The Committee believes that the BCB has the appropriate and necessary 
liquidity instruments linked to macroprudential policy to address localized relevant 
frictions in the system, should they occur. Furthermore, it reinforced that monetary 
policy is more appropriate to act in a counter-cyclical manner on the aggregate demand. 
18. The Committee also discussed the impacts of the fiscal scenario on inflation. In this 
regard, the Copom emphasized again that the net effect of the fiscal policy conduct on 
inflation is highly dependent on the current macroeconomic and financial conditions. 
Copom evaluated that the Ministry of Finance's commitment to the implementation of 
the fiscal package, which is already identified in fiscal statistics and the reinstatement 
of fuel taxes, smooths the fiscal stimuli on demand, reducing the upside risk on inflation 
in the short-term. Furthermore, the Committee will continue monitoring the 
elaboration, discussion, and implementation of the fiscal framework that will be 
presented by the Government and voted by the National Congress. Copom emphasized 
that there is no mechanical relationship between the convergence of inflation and the 
presentation of the fiscal framework, since the former remains conditional on the 
reaction of inflation expectations, the public debt projections, and the asset prices. 
Nevertheless, the Committee stresses that the materialization of a scenario with a solid 

 
and credible fiscal framework might result in a more benign disinflationary process 
through its effect on the expectations channel, by reducing inflation expectations, the 
economic uncertainty, and the risk premium on domestic assets. 
19. The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions. 
Among the upside risks for the inflationary scenario and inflation expectations, it should 
be emphasized (i) a greater persistence of global inflationary pressures; (ii) the 
uncertainty about the fiscal framework and its impacts on the expected path of the 
public debt; and (iii) a larger or more persistent deanchoring of long-term inflation 
expectations. Among the downside risks, it should be noted (i) an additional reduction 
in the prices of international commodities measured in local currency; (ii) a greater than 
projected deceleration of global economic activity, particularly due to adverse 
conditions in the global financial system; and (iii) a slowdown in domestic credit 
granting larger than what would be compatible with the current stance of monetary 
policy.  
20. On the one hand, the recent reinstatement of fuel taxes has reduced the 
uncertainty of the fiscal results in the short term. On the other hand, the current 
scenario, marked by high volatility in financial markets and deanchored long-term 
inflation expectations from the targets, requires further attention when conducting 
monetary policy. The Committee judges that the deanchoring of long-term inflation 
expectations raises the cost of the disinflation that is needed to reach the targets 
established by the National Monetary Council. In this scenario, Copom reaffirms its 
commitment to set monetary policy to meet the targets. 
 
C) Discussion about the conduct of monetary policy 
21. Copom discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of projections 
evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for inflation. 
22. The Committee decided again to emphasize the six-quarter-ahead horizon in its 
projections but anticipates that for the next quarter the Committee will again use the 
usual calendar-year horizon, since the six-quarter horizon ahead will coincide with the 
2024 calendar year, so there will be no more direct effect from the tax changes on the 
usual horizon. 
23. Copom started the debate by evaluating whether the previously outlined strategy 
of stable interest rates would be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation 
towards to its targets. To this end, the Committee has continued its process of analyzing 
the main determinants of the inflation path and how they have behaved in the most 
recent period. No significant change occurred in the prospective scenario for the output 
gap, but a deeper debate took place about the effects of a possible greater-than-
projected credit tightening on economic activity. As for services inflation and inflation 
cores, increased resilience and lower speed are observed in the recent releases, in line 
with the non-linear process already anticipated by Copom. In addition, inflation 
expectations followed a deanchoring process, partially related to the questioning about 
a likely change in future inflation targets. The Committee evaluates that the credibility 
of pursued targets is a fundamental component of the inflation targeting regime and 
contributes to the proper functioning of the expectations channel, making the 
disinflation quicker and less costly.  In this regard, decisions that induce a reanchoring 
of expectations would reduce the disinflationary cost and uncertainties associated with 
this process.   
24. The changes in the Copom’s inflation projections have been primarily affected by 
changes in expectations, as in its previous meeting. Finally, in the balance of risks, most 
of the debate was, on the one hand, between a greater deanchoring of inflation 
expectations in longer terms and, on the other hand, a more abrupt reduction in the 
domestic or global credit granting affecting the economic activity.  Copom emphasized 

 
that the monetary policy conduct, at this moment, requires serenity and patience to 
incorporate the inherent delays in the inflation control through interest rates and, 
therefore, to reach the goals in the relevant monetary policy horizon.  
25. Lastly, the Committee reinforced that the harmony between monetary and fiscal 
policies reduces distortions and uncertainty, facilitates the disinflationary process, and 
fosters full employment over time. In this regard, the Committee reinforces the 
importance that public and private credit granting remains at competitive interest rates 
sensitive to the Selic.   
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
26. Considering the assessed scenarios, the balance of risks, and the broad array of 
available information, the Copom decided to maintain the Selic rate at 13.75% p.a. The 
Committee judges that this decision is consistent with the strategy for inflation 
convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary 
policy, which includes 2023 and, to a larger degree, 2024. Without compromising its 
fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing 
economic fluctuations and fostering full employment. 
27. Taking into account the uncertainty of the scenarios, the Committee remains 
vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a long period will be 
enough to ensure the convergence of inflation. The Committee emphasizes that it will 
persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor 
around its targets, which have shown additional deterioration, especially at longer 
horizons. The Committee reinforces that future monetary policy steps can be adjusted 
and will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does 
not proceed as expected. 
28. The following members of the Committee voted for this decision: Roberto de 
Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Bruno Serra Fernandes, Carolina de Assis Barros, 
Diogo Abry Guillen, Fernanda Magalhães Rumenos Guardado, Maurício Costa de Moura, 
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza, and Renato Dias de Brito Gomes.  
