 
A) Update of economic outlook and Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment remains challenging. The episodes involving banks abroad 
have increased the uncertainty, but with limited contagion on financial conditions so 
far, requiring constant monitoring. The impact of these episodes on financial conditions 
and consequently on global growth is still uncertain but has a negative bias. Major 
economies have emphasized the principle of separation of objectives and instruments 
in the conduct of monetary and macroprudential policies, despite incorporating the 
impacts on activity in their scenarios.  
2. At the same time, the central banks of major economies remain committed to 
bringing inflation back to its targets, in an environment in which inflation has been 
resilient. Recent inflation readings from several countries point to some stabilization of 
core inflation at levels above their targets and reinforce the persistent nature of the 
current inflationary process. Furthermore, most monetary authorities signal a 
prolonged period of high interest rates necessary to fight inflationary pressures, which 
calls for greater caution in the conduct of economic policies also by emerging countries. 
3. Turning to the Brazilian economy, the Committee's expected scenario of gradual 
growth slowdown is still corroborated by the recent set of indicators. Some moderation 
is observed in the coincident indicators of activity, as well as a slowdown in the credit 
market at the margin. The labor market, which surprised positively throughout 2022, 
has shown resilience, with a net increase in job creation and relative stability in the 
unemployment rate. 
4. Consumer inflation remains high. The inflation of the components more sensitive to 
the economic cycle and to the monetary policy, which present greater inflationary 
inertia, remains above the range compatible with meeting the inflation target. Inflation 
expectations for 2023 and 2024 collected by the Focus survey have increased 
marginally and are around 6.1% and 4.2%, respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
5. In the reference scenario, the interest rate path is extracted from the Focus survey, 
and the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 5.052 and evolves according to the purchasing 
power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the 
futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year 
onwards. Moreover, the energy flag is assumed to be “green” in December 2023 and 
2024. In this scenario, Copom’s inflation projections stand at 5.8% for 2023 and 3.6% 
for 2024. Inflation projections for administered prices are 10.8% for 2023 and 5.2% for 
2024.  
6. The Committee analyzed an alternative scenario with stable interest rates over the 
entire relevant horizon. In such scenario, inflation projections stand at 5.7% for 2023 
and 2.9% for 2024.  
7. The neutral real interest rate is the rate in which, in the absence of impact from other 
factors, the inflation rate remains stable, and the output grows according to its 
potential, reflecting productivity gains and changes in the structural fundamentals of 
the economy. In assessing the factors that could lead to unfold an alternative scenario 
characterized by a higher neutral interest rate, emphasis was placed on the possible 
adoption of expansionary parafiscal policies, which can increase the neutral rate and 
reduce the power of monetary policy, as previously remarked by the Committee. Still 
regarding the debate about the current neutral interest rate in the economy, some 
members raised an additional aspect, related to the recent economic data set. These 
members pointed out that a scenario marked by a possible rise in neutral interest rates 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into account changes that occurred since the March 
Copom meeting (253rd meeting). 
2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding the average USD/BRL exchange rate observed 
on the five business days ending on the last day of the week before the Copom meeting. 

 
in major economies, resilience in Brazilian activity, and a slow disinflationary process 
could be compatible with a higher measure of neutral rate than that assumed by the 
Committee. Under this argument, therefore, the current monetary tightening would 
lead to a lower contractionary impact than that implicit in the Copom's scenarios. 
However, most of the committee members judged that this interpretation still seems 
premature and needs further corroboration by data.  
8. Regarding the global outlook, the low degree of labor market slack in some 
economies and a persistently high current inflation and widespread in the services 
sector suggest that inflationary pressures should last longer. In this context, reducing 
inflationary pressures continues to require the commitment and determination of 
central banks to control inflation by maintaining the tightening of financial conditions 
for a longer period. Such determination, with a likely impact upon asset prices in the 
short term, coupled with a credit slowdown in major economies, contributes to a more 
credible and lasting global disinflationary process.  
9. Despite the limited contagion from the recent financial instability in the US banking 
sector, a further tightening of credit conditions is observed in that country. Thus, 
despite the reduction in the likelihood of a disruption in the credit market, a scenario 
with a more restricted credit supply and, consequently, lower economic growth, 
prevails. The Committee will continue to monitor this situation, analyzing possible 
transmission channels, although the direct impact on the domestic financial system is 
deemed limited. The Committee reinforces that the best contribution of monetary 
policy is to fight inflationary pressures and smooth economic fluctuations, and it 
emphasizes, once again, the separation of instruments between the objectives of 
inflation control and financial stability. 
10. Brazilian activity data point to a moderate pace of growth at the margin, with 
emphasis on the support given by consumption, on the demand side, and by the 
agricultural and livestock sector, on the supply side. Some members reminded that the 
methodological changes in monthly activity surveys may increase uncertainty in GDP 
projections and in the current assessment of activity. Copom anticipates a more 
vigorous GDP growth in the release of the first quarter of 2023, especially due to 
agricultural production, followed by moderation in economic activity in an environment 
marked by resilience in the labor market. In addition, formal employment data 
continued to reveal increase of job creation in the most recent period. Some members 
noted that there is a movement towards a partial recomposition of recent losses in real 
wages. This movement is expected and has been accompanied by a deceleration in 
nominal gains, which is expected to intensify ahead. Finally, it was noted that the 
economic growth outlook has not changed significantly in the recent period. 
11. The Committee believes that the disinflation dynamics continues to be 
characterized by a process with two distinct stages. In the first stage, already 
completed, the speed of disinflation was greater, with a greater effect on administered 
prices and an indirect effect on market prices through less inertia. In the second stage, 
which has been currently observed, the speed of disinflation is slower, and core inflation 
– which is more affected by the aggregate demand and the interest rate policy – 
declines at a slower pace, responding to the output gap and future inflation 
expectations. The most recent inflationary data support the view of a slower 
disinflation process, in line with the view of an inflation driven by excess of demand, 
mostly in the services segment. The Committee reaffirms that the disinflation process 
at its current stage demands serenity and patience in the conduct of monetary policy to 
ensure the convergence of inflation to its targets. 
12. Still in the discussion about inflationary behavior, the recent benign behavior of 
wholesale prices was emphasized, both for food and industrial goods, in line with the 
Committee's view. In addition, due to a comfortable water scenario for 2023, the green 
energy flag is assumed for December. Moreover, seeking to avoid an excessive impact 
of the assumption about energy tariff flags, which are inherently affected by a lot of 
uncertainty for longer horizons, on inflation projections and with possible impacts on 

 
the conduct of monetary policy, it was decided to adopt the neutral flag, i.e., green flag 
for December 2024, also in line with the view of most analysts outlined in the pre-
Copom questionnaire. In terms of the trajectory of consumer inflation over 2023, it 
should be noted that a relevant drop is expected in the twelve-month inflation during 
this second quarter, due to the base effect of the previous year. In the second half of 
2023, as the twelve-month inflation no longer includes the effects of the tax measures 
that reduced the price level in the third quarter of 2022 and the effects of this year's 
tax measures will still be included, this inflation indicator will rise. Copom, therefore, 
emphasizes that such behavior does not reflect the underlying inflationary dynamics, 
nor does it change the view on future prospects.  
13. Inflation expectations remain deanchored from the targets set by the National 
Monetary Council, having slightly deteriorated at the margin. The Committee is 
following this movement with concern and continues to assess that deanchored 
expectations raise the cost of bringing inflation back to the target. It was emphasized 
again that the behavior of expectations is a fundamental aspect of the inflationary 
process since it serves as a guide for present and future prices and wages setting. Thus, 
as expectations rise, there is a greater rise in prices in the current period and the 
inflationary process is fueled by these expectations. It was also highlighted that the 
anchoring of expectations is a key factor for price stability. In this context, the 
Committee reinforces that decisions that induce to the reanchoring of expectations and 
that raise confidence in the inflation targets would contribute to a faster and less costly 
disinflation process. 
14. The domestic credit granting scenario seems compatible with the current stage of 
the monetary policy cycle, despite the persistence of a stronger decrease in the supply 
of credit in specific modalities. The Committee anticipates a moderation in credit 
granting over the next few months, but in line with what has been observed in previous 
monetary policy tightening cycles. The Committee believes that the BCB has the 
appropriate and necessary liquidity instruments, associated with macroprudential 
policy, to deal with relevant frictions in the system, should they occur.  
15. The Committee also discussed the impacts of the fiscal scenario on inflation and 
assesses that the presentation of the fiscal framework has reduced the uncertainty 
associated with extreme scenarios of public debt growth. The Committee will continue 
to monitor the processing and implementation of the fiscal framework presented by 
the government and under discussion in the National Congress. Copom again 
emphasized that there is no mechanical relationship between the convergence of 
inflation and the approval of the fiscal framework since the inflation path is conditional 
on the reaction of inflation expectations and financial conditions. The materialization 
of a scenario with a solid and credible fiscal framework may lead to a more benign 
disinflation process through its effect on the expectations channel, by reducing 
inflation expectations, uncertainty in the economy, the risk premium associated with 
domestic assets and, consequently, the Committee's projections. 
16. The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions. 
Among the upside risks for the inflationary scenario and inflation expectations, it should 
be emphasized (i) a greater persistence of global inflationary pressures; (ii) the lingering 
uncertainty about the final fiscal framework to be approved by the National Congress 
and, more relevant for monetary policy, its impacts on the expected paths of the public 
debt and of inflation expectations, and on risky assets; and (iii) a larger or more 
persistent deanchoring of long-term inflation expectations. Among the downside risks, 
it should be noted (i) an additional reduction in the prices of international commodities 
measured in local currency; (ii) a greater than projected deceleration of global economic 
activity, particularly due to adverse conditions in the global financial system; and (iii) a 
slowdown in domestic credit granting larger than what would be compatible with the 
current stance of monetary policy.  
17. On the one hand, the reinstatement of fuel taxes and, primarily, the presentation 
of a proposal for the fiscal framework have partly reduced the uncertainty arising from 

 
fiscal policy. On the other hand, the current scenario, characterized by a stage in which 
the disinflationary process tends to be slower in an environment of deanchored 
inflation expectations, requires further attention when conducting monetary policy. 
Copom emphasizes that there is no mechanical relationship between the convergence 
of inflation and the approval of the fiscal framework, and judges that the deanchoring 
of long-term inflation expectations raises the cost of the disinflation that is needed to 
reach the targets established by the National Monetary Council. In this scenario, Copom 
reaffirms its commitment to set monetary policy to meet the targets.  
C) Discussion about the conduct of monetary policy conduct  
18. Copom discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of projections 
evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for inflation. 
19. Copom started the debate by evaluating whether the previously outlined strategy 
of stable interest rates would be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation 
towards to its targets. To this end, the Committee has continued its process of analyzing 
the main determinants of the inflation path and how they have behaved in the most 
recent period. No significant change occurred in the prospective scenario for the output 
gap. As for services inflation and measures of core inflation, increased resilience and 
lower speed are observed in the recent releases, in line with the non-linear process 
already anticipated by Copom. In addition, inflation expectations remain deanchored, 
partially related to the questioning about a possible change in future inflation targets.  
20. Copom's inflation projections have remained relatively stable since the previous 
meeting. Finally, in the balance of risks, besides the factors already mentioned, the 
Committee evaluates that the probability of the most extreme scenarios for the public 
debt trajectory has reduced, but also noted that there was no relevant change in the 
inflation projections since expectations did not change significantly. This behavior 
reinforces the understanding that there is no mechanical relationship between 
monetary policy and the fiscal framework. Copom emphasized that the conduct of 
monetary policy, at this moment, requires serenity and patience to incorporate the 
inherent delays in the inflation control through interest rates and, therefore, to reach 
the goals in the relevant monetary policy horizon. Therefore, the Committee assessed 
that the scenarios that could require a resumption of the monetary policy tightening 
cycle have become less likely.  
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
21. Considering the assessed scenarios, the balance of risks, and the broad array of 
available information, Copom decided to maintain the Selic rate at 13.75% p.a. The 
Committee judges that this decision is consistent with the strategy for inflation 
convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary 
policy, which includes the year of 2024. Without compromising its fundamental 
objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also implies smoothing economic 
fluctuations and fostering full employment. 
22. Taking into account the uncertainty of the scenarios, the Committee remains 
vigilant, assessing if the strategy of maintaining the Selic rate for a long period will be 
enough to ensure the convergence of inflation. The Committee emphasizes that it will 
persist until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation expectations anchor 
around its targets. The Committee judges that the current scenario demands patience 
and serenity in the conduct of monetary policy. Copom emphasizes that, although a less 
likely scenario, it will not hesitate to resume the tightening cycle if the disinflationary 
process does not proceed as expected. 
23. The following members of the Committee voted for this decision: Roberto de 
Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Diogo Abry Guillen, Fernanda Magalhães Rumenos 
Guardado, Maurício Costa de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Sérgio Neves de 
Souza, and Renato Dias de Brito Gomes.  
