 
A) Update of economic outlook and Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment remains volatile and is less adverse than in the previous 
meeting, with a reduction in longer-term interest rates in the United States and 
incipient signs of lower core inflation, despite remaining at high levels in many 
countries.  
2. The central banks of major economies remain committed to bringing inflation back 
to its targets in an environment characterized by labor market pressures. The 
Committee judges that the environment continues to require caution from emerging 
market economies. 
3. Regarding the domestic outlook, the recent set of economic activity indicators 
remains consistent with the economic deceleration scenario expected by the 
Committee. The release of the third-quarter GDP figures confirmed the anticipated 
moderation in growth, but with resilience in household consumption.  The labor market 
remains strong but with some moderation at the margin. 
4. Consumer inflation follows the expected path of disinflation and its benign 
composition stands out. The inflation of the components more sensitive to the 
economic cycle and the monetary policy came closer to the inflation target in the most 
recent releases. Inflation expectations for 2023, 2024, and 2025 collected by the Focus 
survey are around 4.5%, 3.9%, and 3.5%, respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
5. In the reference scenario, the interest rate path is extracted from the Focus survey, 
and the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 4.902 and evolves according to the purchasing 
power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the 
futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year. 
Moreover, the energy flag is assumed to be “green” in December 2024 and 2025. In this 
scenario, Copom’s inflation projections stand at 4.6% for 2023, 3.5% for 2024, and 3.2% 
for 2025. Inflation projections for administered prices are 9.1% for 2023, 4.5% for 2024, 
and 3.6% for 2025. 
6. The Committee believes that the international environment is less adverse than at 
the previous meeting. The most recent data, although still incipient, suggest moderate 
growth and slowdown of inflationary pressures in some countries, especially in the 
groups of industrial goods and energy commodities. As a result, for several Copom 
members, the probability of a soft landing in the United States has increased. This 
environment has allowed some countries to signal a shift in monetary policy, while 
other countries have maintained their strategy of prolonged monetary policy 
tightening, which has been essential to contain global inflation. The Committee again 
focused on the sources and uncertainties for the future disinflationary process, 
contrasting the improvement in the current inflationary outlook with the challenges 
still ahead, such as the uncertain geopolitical context, the heated labor markets, and 
the tight output gap in several advanced economies. Given the recent volatility and 
uncertainty ahead on the international outlook, Copom maintained its assessment that 
it is appropriate to adopt a cautious stance, especially in emerging countries. In addition, 
it will continue to monitor the data from the global economy and their respective 
transmission channels to the domestic economy. 
 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update considers changes that occurred since the October/November 
Copom meeting (258th meeting). 
2 Corresponds to the rounded value of the average USD/BRL exchange rate observed on the ten working days 
ending on the last day of the week prior to the Copom meeting, according to the procedure adopted since 
the 258th meeting. 

 
7. Regarding the domestic economic activity, the release of GDP for the third quarter 
indicated a moderation in economic growth, in line with the scenario of activity 
slowdown over the second half of the year anticipated by the Committee. The resilience 
of household consumption – which surprised positively again – may be related to an 
increase in gross household income, due to the expansion of the labor market, social 
benefits, and income gains related to disinflation in important segments of the 
consumer’s basket. In turn, gross fixed capital formation – which is more sensitive to 
financial conditions and future prospects and uncertainties – continues to fall, after a 
sharp rise during the pandemic period. Some members judged that the persistence of 
a combination of greater resilience in consumption and reduction of investment could 
lead to demand exceeding supply in the medium term, with potential impacts on prices. 
In short, activity data released since the previous meeting corroborate the scenario 
outlined by Copom. 
8. Copom reinforced its view that the lack of commitment to structural reforms and 
fiscal discipline, the increase of earmarked credit granting, and the uncertainties about 
the stabilization of the public debt have the potential to raise the neutral interest rate 
of the economy, with harmful impacts on the power of monetary policy and, 
consequently, on the cost of disinflation in terms of activity. 
9. In the Copom's analysis of the labor market, formal job hiring remains at high levels 
and compatible with a very dynamic labor market.  Although real income gains increased 
in the most recent period, the Committee maintained its assessment that this 
development may reflect temporary issues and that there is no evidence of high wage 
pressures in labor negotiations. The Committee deemed important to continue 
monitoring the several labor market variables very closely, in particular the dynamics of 
real income. Copom will continue to pay attention to the dynamics of earnings coming 
from several surveys to better evaluate the degree of slack in the labor market and its 
potential impacts on the services inflation. 
10. Corporate credit granting registered a higher deceleration, coupled with a 
recomposition that involves relatively less credit from the banking sector and more 
from the capital markets. Despite the tight monetary conditions, Copom emphasized 
that a transmission of the monetary policy cycle expected by the market to the current 
rates of new credit grants is already taking place, leading, in particular, to greater 
dynamism in the capital market in the recent period.  
11. On the fiscal front, the Committee reaffirms the importance of firmly pursuing the 
already established fiscal targets, given their importance for the anchoring of inflation 
expectations, and hence for the conduct of monetary policy. 
12. The disinflationary dynamics did not diverge significantly from what the Committee 
expected, as the benign evolution of the current inflation scenario continues, and some 
sources that contributed to the first stage of disinflation have been exhausted. The 
underlying services component showed some downward surprises, which prompted a 
discussion about the reasons for this result, which include, among others, the 
normalization of relative prices, the inertial impact of headline inflation, the benign 
behavior of wages, the stronger movement of primary shocks in commodity and food, 
and the lagged impacts of monetary policy. The prospective evolution of the output 
gap and the behavior of the labor market were considered very relevant in determining 
the speed with which inflation will reach the target. Based on more evidence, the 
Committee slightly raised the inflationary impact of the El Niño weather phenomenon 
on food inflation. In the end, it was unanimously concluded that a contractionary and 
cautious monetary policy was needed to reinforce the disinflationary dynamics. 
13. Inflation expectations remain unanchored and are a cause for concern. The 
Committee believes that lowering expectations requires firm action by the monetary 
authority, as well as continued strengthening of the credibility and reputation of both 
the institutions and the fiscal and monetary frameworks that make up the Brazilian 

 
economic policy. 
14. The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions. 
Among the upside risks for the inflationary scenario and inflation expectations, it should 
be emphasized (i) a greater persistence of global inflationary pressures; and (ii) a 
stronger-than-expected resilience of services inflation due to a tighter output gap. 
Among the downside risks, it should be noted (i) a greater-than-projected deceleration 
of global economic activity; and (ii) an impact on global inflation larger than expected 
from synchronized monetary policy tightening. In light of the international 
environment, the Committee judges that the current conjuncture remains uncertain 
and requires caution on the conduct of monetary policy. 
 
C) Discussion about the conduct of monetary policy 
15. Copom then discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of 
projections evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for inflation. 
16. The Committee believes that there has been a significant disinflationary progress, 
in line with what the Committee had anticipated, but there is still a long way to go to 
anchor expectations and bring inflation back to the target, which requires serenity and 
moderation in the conduct of monetary policy. In addition, uncertainty, particularly in 
this volatile international environment, recommends caution in the conduct of 
monetary policy. The Committee recalled that the incorporation of scenarios and 
exogenous variables, such as fiscal dynamics or the external scenario, takes place 
through their impact on the prospective dynamics of inflation, with no mechanical 
relationship with the determination of the interest rate. 
17. The domestic scenario is moving in line with what was expected. The conclusion is 
that the disinflationary path of core and services inflation continues, reinforcing the 
benign dynamics of recent inflation. In addition, as anticipated by the Committee, 
recent data suggest a moderation in economic activity. Inflation expectations for longer 
maturities have remained unanchored since the previous Copom meeting. Finally, 
inflation projections for the relevant horizon have not changed significantly, standing 
above the target. 
18. After the scenario evaluation, all members agreed that it was appropriate to reduce 
the Selic rate by 0.50 percentage point to adjust the degree of prospective monetary 
tightening. 
19. The Committee analyzed various prospective scenarios, characterized by different 
trajectories in the domestic and international environments. Then, it discussed the 
appropriate strategy and cycle length in each of these scenarios. It was decided to 
maintain the recent communication, which already includes the appropriate 
conditionality in an uncertain environment, specifying the course of action if the 
expected scenario is confirmed. Regarding the next steps, Copom members 
unanimously anticipated cuts of 0.50 percentage point in the next meetings and judged 
that this pace is appropriate to keep the necessary contractionary monetary policy for 
the disinflationary process. On the one hand, this pace brings together the firm 
commitment with the reanchoring of expectations and the disinflationary dynamics 
and, on the other hand, the adjustment in the level of monetary tightening in real terms 
in face of the more benign dynamics of the anticipated inflation in the reference 
scenario projections. 
20. Finally, the Committee discussed the extension of the monetary policy adjustments 
cycle. The Committee assesses the need to maintain a still contractionary monetary 
policy in the relevant horizon to consolidate the inflation convergence to the target and 
the anchoring of expectations. Copom emphasized again that the extension of the cycle 
over time will depend on the inflationary dynamics, especially the components that are 
more sensitive to monetary policy and economic activity, on inflation expectations, in 

 
particular the longer-term ones, on its inflation projections, on the output gap, and on 
the balance of risks. The Committee maintains its firm commitment to the convergence 
of inflation to the target in the relevant horizon and reinforces that the extension of 
the cycle will reflect the BCB’s legal mandate. 
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
21. Considering the evolution of the disinflationary process, the assessed scenarios, the 
balance of risks, and the broad array of available information, Copom decided to reduce 
the Selic rate by 0.50 percentage point, to 11.75% p.a., and judges that this decision is 
consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target 
throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2024 and 2025. 
Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this 
decision also implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full employment. 
22. The current context, characterized by a stage in which the disinflationary process 
tends to be slower, with only partial reanchoring of inflation expectations and a 
challenging global outlook, requires serenity and moderation in the conduct of 
monetary policy. The Committee reinforces the need to persist on a contractionary 
monetary policy until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation 
expectations anchor around its targets. 
23. If the scenario evolves as expected, the Committee members unanimously 
anticipate further reductions of the same magnitude in the next meetings, and judge 
that this pace is appropriate to keep the necessary contractionary monetary policy for 
the disinflationary process. The Committee emphasizes that the total magnitude of the 
easing cycle throughout time will depend on the inflation dynamics, especially the 
components that are more sensitive to monetary policy and economic activity, on 
inflation expectations, in particular the longer-term ones, on its inflation projections, on 
the output gap, and on the balance of risks. 
24. The following members of the Committee voted for a reduction of 0.50 percentage 
point: Roberto de Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Ailton de Aquino Santos, Carolina 
de Assis Barros, Diogo Abry Guillen, Fernanda Magalhães Rumenos Guardado, Gabriel 
Muricca Galípolo, Maurício Costa de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, and Renato Dias de 
Brito Gomes. 
 
