 
A) Update of the economic outlook and the Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment remains volatile, with debates about the beginning of the 
monetary policy easing in major economies and the speed with which inflation will fall 
in a sustained way in many countries.  
2. The central banks of major economies remain committed to bringing inflation back 
to its targets in a context characterized by labor market pressures. The Committee 
judges that the environment continues to require caution from emerging market 
economies. 
3. Regarding the domestic outlook, the recent set of economic activity indicators 
remains consistent with the economic deceleration scenario expected by the 
Committee. Economic growth has moderated somewhat, but with greater dynamism in 
some indicators at the margin, while the labor market remains strong and with 
acceleration of real income. 
4. Consumer inflation remains on its path of disinflation. The inflation of the 
components more sensitive to the economic cycle and the monetary policy stood above 
the inflation target in the most recent releases. Inflation expectations for 2024 and 
2025 collected by the Focus survey are around 3.8% and 3.5%, respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
5. In the baseline scenario, the interest rate path is extracted from the Focus survey and 
the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 4.952 and evolves according to the purchasing 
power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the 
futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year. 
Moreover, the energy flag is assumed to be “green” in December 2024 and 2025. In this 
scenario, Copom’s inflation projections stand at 3.5% for 2024 and 3.2% for 2025. 
Inflation projections for administered prices are 4.4% for 2024 and 3.9% for 2025. 
6. The reduction in prices volatility in emerging countries contrasts with an international 
environment that remains volatile. The scenario marked by a sound U.S. economy and 
resilient inflation permeates the debate on the sources, challenges, and uncertainties 
for the future disinflationary process in that country. Regarding sources, the Committee 
discussed the role of the normalization of productive chains and the consequent benign 
recomposition of relative prices between goods and services, the slowdown of 
commodity prices, Chinese disinflation and, to a greater extent, the role of monetary 
policy in the U.S. in reducing inflation in a sustained manner. It was pointed out that, as 
in the Brazilian case, the final stage of disinflation is more costly and requires caution in 
the conduct of monetary policy. Still in the subject, Copom reaffirmed that there is no 
mechanical relationship between the conduct of the U.S. monetary policy and the 
determination of the domestic policy interest rate, and that, as usual, it will focus on 
the transmission mechanisms from the external environment into the domestic 
inflationary dynamics.  
7. Regarding the challenges of the external scenario, in addition to geopolitical 
tensions, some subjects were mentioned. Firstly, the speed of disinflation in a scenario 
of strong activity and a resilient labor market has once again become the subject of 
much debate, besides, for a longer horizon, the role of fiscal impacts on the aggregate 
demand and provision of liquidity and the channeling of credit resources to the 
economy. Finally, regarding uncertainties for the prospective disinflationary process, 
Copom discussed, on a global perspective, the response functions of monetary policy in 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update considers changes since the January Copom meeting (260th 
meeting). 
2 Corresponds to the rounded value of the average USD/BRL exchange rate observed over the ten working 
days ending on the last day of the week prior to the Copom meeting, according to the procedure adopted 
since the 258th meeting. 

 
major economies, the role of relative prices between goods and services, the 
relationship between the labor market and inflation, the interaction between monetary 
and fiscal policy and, lastly, the global financial cycle and risk aversion The Committee 
maintained its assessment that it is appropriate to adopt a cautious stance, especially in 
emerging countries. In addition, it will continue to monitor the data from the global 
economy and their respective transmission channels to the domestic economy. 
8. Regarding the domestic economic activity, Copom firstly debated the release of GDP 
for 2023Q4, especially emphasizing the growth composition of demand components. 
A reduction in the growth impetus of household consumption compared with the 
previous quarters and to auxiliary monthly surveys was noticed. When assessing 
consumption over the recent years, the prevailing view was, even so, that consumption 
was sustained by the labor market dynamics, both at the employment and wages level, 
the increased social benefits, the slow deleveraging of households and, lastly, the 
disinflationary process that favors the expansion of real disposable income.  
9. For the prospective scenario, due to the factors mentioned above, as well as to the 
increase of the minimum wage, the reduction of the impact of the monetary tightening 
over time, fiscal transfers, and the recovering stage of the credit cycle, the assessment 
that consumption will continue resilient persists.  Furthermore, Copom mentioned that 
some high frequency indicators would allow a reading that corroborates this argument, 
including some surprise in the more recent releases of services and trade surveys, 
raising the growth projection for the quarter. The Committee also discussed the 
reasons for the drop in investment momentum over 2023, highlighting increased 
uncertainty and restrictive financial conditions. The Committee noticed that the 
increased appetite for credit granting as well as lower interest rates and the easing of 
financial conditions suggest a more favorable scenario for investment over 2024, as 
already observed in 2023Q4. In short, released activity data reinforce the perception of 
a scenario characterized by economic activity resilience, although no substantial change 
was observed in the growth prospect. 
10. Copom reinforced its view that the lack of commitment to structural reforms and 
fiscal discipline, the increase of earmarked credit granting, and the uncertainties about 
the stabilization of the public debt have the potential to raise the neutral interest rate 
of the economy, with harmful impacts on the power of monetary policy and, 
consequently, on the cost of disinflation in terms of activity. 
11. The Committee discussed thoroughly the labor market and assessed that the 
current wage increases may be linked to some extent to pressures in the labor market. 
Some members recalled that, over the latest meetings, the Committee has emphasized 
data relative to earnings, as there remains a wide debate about the tightness of the 
labor market in view of methodological issues regarding employment surveys, the 
pandemic impacts, and the labor reform. Some members perceived that the 
productivity recovery in 2023 mostly occurred in agriculture and livestock, while 
pressures on earnings were widespread, suggesting that pressured earnings should not 
be mainly explained by productivity gains, but by the narrowing of the output gap. In its 
analysis, the Committee was therefore more concerned about the possible effects of 
increased real gains in the more recent period and the growth acceleration seen in 
overall income data on the prospective dynamics of services inflation. The Committee 
continued its discussion on the relationship between the labor market and prices in the 
economy. It highlighted the reciprocal causality between prices and the income 
dynamics, their respective lags, and the elasticities of impact of one on the other. 
Moreover, Copom stressed that it will continue incorporating labor market data into 
the analysis with no mechanical or definitive view about any impacts or relationships 
whatsoever. Copom will continue to pay attention to the dynamics of income stemming 
from various surveys to better evaluate the degree of slack in the labor market and its 
potential impacts on the services inflation. 
12. Despite the restrictive monetary conditions, Copom emphasized that the cycle of 

 
monetary easing is already being transmitted to the credit market. There are signs of 
increased credit granting and reduction in current interest rates on new operations, also 
helped by an incipient growing appetite of financial institutions to offer credit. Since 
the previous meeting, the capital market has also shown greater dynamics. 
13. On the fiscal front, the Committee reaffirms the importance of firmly pursuing the 
already established fiscal targets, given their importance for the anchoring of inflation 
expectations, and hence for the conduct of monetary policy. 
14. Copom judged that the disinflationary dynamics did not diverge significantly from 
what was expected but evaluates that the inflation scenario seems more uncertain. On 
the one hand, short-term food projections have somewhat slowed down, reverting the 
recent increases, while industrial prices continue on a benign trajectory. On the other 
hand, the recurrence of inflationary surprises on services inflation, particularly on the 
underlying components and labor-intensive items, raises doubts about the speed of the 
prospective disinflation. Copom evaluates that a relevant part of the services 
disinflation was due to the spillover from disinflations in food and industrial goods and 
the intensification of the disinflationary process, now in its second stage, will be greatly 
associated with the labor market and aggregate demand scenario. The prospective 
evolution of the output gap and the behavior of the labor market were again 
considered very relevant in determining the speed with which inflation will reach the 
target. A tighter labor market, with wage adjustments above the inflation target and 
without corresponding productivity gains, could potentially slow down inflation 
convergence, impacting notably services inflation and more labor-intensive sectors. 
Conversely, a favorable recovery of relative prices, a benign commodity dynamics or 
lower services inflation could potentially contribute to a faster disinflationary process. 
In its conclusion, the Committee considers that the prospective inflation scenario has 
not changed substantially but is more uncertain. In the end, it was unanimously 
concluded that a contractionary and cautious monetary policy was needed to reinforce 
the disinflationary dynamics. 
15. Inflation expectations remain unanchored and are a cause for concern. Copom 
mentioned that a scenario of expectations above the target for a prolonged period 
requires a closer monitoring to ensure, even in this scenario, the achievement of the 
inflation target. The Committee believes that lowering expectations requires firm 
action by the monetary authority, as well as continued strengthening of the credibility 
and reputation of both the institutions and the fiscal and monetary frameworks that 
make up the Brazilian economic policy. 
16. The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions. 
Among the upside risks for the inflationary scenario and inflation expectations, it should 
be emphasized (i) a greater persistence of global inflationary pressures; and (ii) a 
stronger-than-expected resilience of services inflation due to a tighter output gap. 
Among the downside risks, it should be noted (i) a greater-than-projected deceleration 
of global economic activity; and (ii) an impact on global inflation larger than expected 
from synchronized monetary policy tightening. The Committee judges that the 
domestic and international environments are more uncertain, requiring caution on the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
 
C) Discussion of the conduct of monetary policy 
17. Copom then discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of 
projections evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for the prospective inflation. 
18. The baseline scenario for inflation and economic activity did not differ substantially 
from what was projected. Activity is resilient and labor market, dynamic. Both income 
and credit have behaved in such a way as to mitigate the slowdown in activity in the 
recent period, supporting the view that the scenario continues to be of gradual 

 
deceleration. In the labor market, the emphasis was on the acceleration of earnings and 
the overall income, reinforcing the diagnosis of a dynamic labor market. Given the 
difficulty of reaching a firm conclusion on the time lags between the labor market and 
economic activity, the Committee will continue to monitor data thoroughly. Regarding 
inflation, as expected in the second stage of disinflation, the speed of disinflation is 
slowing down, requiring serenity and moderation in the conduct of monetary policy.  
19. The Committee believes that there is greater uncertainty in the domestic and 
international contexts. Internationally, the disinflationary scenario is more uncertain, 
due to the context of resilient activity in the U.S. and its impact on global financial 
conditions. In addition, the impact of monetary policy on activity and inflation also 
creates uncertainty about the speed of disinflation in several countries. Regarding 
domestic inflationary dynamics, while on the one hand we see benign behavior in food 
and industrial goods, on the other hand, due to resilient activity and the latest releases, 
there are doubts about the speed of disinflation in services. The Committee noted that 
a slower disinflationary process, both domestically and globally, does not constitute the 
baseline scenario but has been incorporated as a source of uncertainty. This increased 
uncertainty recommends caution in the conduct of monetary policy. The Committee 
recalled that the incorporation of scenarios and exogenous variables, such as fiscal 
dynamics or the external scenario, takes place through their impact on the prospective 
dynamics of inflation, with no mechanical relationship with the determination of the 
interest rate. 
20. After the scenario evaluation, all members agreed that it was appropriate to reduce 
the Selic rate by 0.50 percentage points to adjust the degree of prospective monetary 
tightening. 
21. The Committee then started debating the future signaling of the conduct of 
monetary policy. It gave a positive assessment of the use of a conditional signal for 
subsequent meetings over the last few meetings, reinforcing that it has fulfilled its role 
of coordinating expectations, increasing the power of monetary policy, and reducing 
volatility. It was noted that, so far, the benefits of signaling with an extended horizon 
have outweighed the costs in both the ex-ante and ex-post assessment. 
22. The debate then turned to communication in a scenario where greater flexibility is 
required to conduct the appropriate monetary policy to achieve the inflation target. 
Copom assessed the convenience of some indication for the June decision, for which it 
had not yet made any announcement. The baseline scenario had not changed 
substantially but given its uncertainties, it was deemed appropriate to have greater 
monetary policy flexibility. Even though the communication already contained a built-
in conditionality, Copom felt that it did not provide the required flexibility. In addition, 
it was argued that a late withdrawal, possibly seen as an unfulfilled promise, should be 
avoided because it could have an impact on the future credibility of the communication 
and cause excessive volatility. After all the arguments, the Committee unanimously 
concluded that the more uncertain scenario reduced the benefit of future signaling and 
increased its costs. This assessment led the Committee to communicate that it 
anticipated a reduction of the same magnitude at the next meeting, stressing that the 
change in communication was due to a change in uncertainty and not in the baseline 
scenario. This change only reflects a cost-benefit analysis of the use of this additional 
monetary policy instrument. Finally, it was emphasized that it would be a mistake to 
interpret the change in the future signaling as an indication of a change in the monetary 
policy cycle compatible with the baseline scenario. 
23. The Committee believes that information provided by updating the analyzed data 
sets will be particularly important in defining the terminal interest rate and its 
respective path. Some members also argued that if prospective uncertainty remains 
high in the future, a slower pace of monetary easing may prove appropriate, for 
whatever terminal rate is desired. The Committee unanimously maintained its view that 
the interest rate and its respective path will be those necessary to bring inflation back 

 
to its target in the relevant monetary policy horizon. 
24. Finally, the Committee discussed the extension of the monetary policy adjustments 
cycle. The Committee perceives the need to maintain a still contractionary monetary 
policy in the relevant horizon to consolidate the inflation convergence to the target and 
the anchoring of expectations. Copom emphasized again that the extension of the cycle 
over time will depend on the inflationary dynamics, especially the components that are 
more sensitive to monetary policy and economic activity, on inflation expectations, 
particularly the longer-term ones, on its inflation projections, on the output gap, and on 
the balance of risks. The Committee maintains its firm commitment to the convergence 
of inflation to the target in the relevant horizon and reinforces that the extension of 
the cycle will reflect the BCB’s legal mandate. 
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
25. Considering the evolution of the disinflationary process, the assessed scenarios, the 
balance of risks, and the broad array of available information, Copom decided to reduce 
the Selic rate by 0.50 percentage points, to 10.75% p.a., and judges that this decision is 
consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target 
throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2024 and, to a 
larger degree, 2025. Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price 
stability, this decision also implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full 
employment. 
26. The current context, characterized by a stage in which the disinflationary process 
tends to be slower, with only partial reanchoring of inflation expectations and a 
challenging global outlook, requires serenity and moderation in the conduct of 
monetary policy. The Committee reinforces the need to persist on a contractionary 
monetary policy until the disinflationary process consolidates and inflation 
expectations anchor around its targets. 
27. The committee judges that the baseline scenario has not changed substantially. Due 
to heightened uncertainty and the need for more flexibility in the conduct of monetary 
policy, the Committee members unanimously decided to communicate that, if the 
scenario evolves as expected, they anticipate a reduction of the same magnitude in the 
next meeting. The Committee judges that this monetary policy stance is appropriate to 
keep the necessary contractionary monetary policy for the disinflationary process. 
28. The Committee emphasizes that the total magnitude of the easing cycle 
throughout time will depend on the inflation dynamics, especially the components that 
are more sensitive to monetary policy and economic activity, on inflation expectations, 
in particular the longer-term ones, on its inflation projections, on the output gap, and 
on the balance of risks. 
29. The following members of the Committee voted for a reduction of 0.50 percentage 
points: Roberto de Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Ailton de Aquino Santos, Carolina 
de Assis Barros, Diogo Abry Guillen, Gabriel Muricca Galípolo, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, 
Paulo Picchetti, Renato Dias de Brito Gomes, and Rodrigo Alves Teixeira. 
