 
A) Update of the economic outlook and the Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment has become more adverse because of the heightened and 
persistent uncertainty about the beginning of the easing cycle in the United States and 
the speed of sustained disinflation in many countries.  
2. The central banks of major economies remain committed to bringing inflation back 
to its targets in a context characterized by labor market pressures. The Committee 
judges that the environment continues to require caution from emerging market 
economies. 
3. Regarding the domestic scenario, the set of indicators on economic activity and labor 
market has exhibited more strength than expected by Copom.  
4. Headline consumer inflation remains in a path of disinflation, while various measures 
of underlying inflation are above the inflation target in recent releases. Inflation 
expectations for 2024 and 2025 collected by the Focus survey are around 3.7% and 
3.6%, respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
5. In the reference scenario, the interest rate path is extracted from the Focus survey, 
and the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 5.152 and evolves according to the purchasing 
power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the 
futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year. 
Moreover, the energy flag is assumed to be “green” in December of years 2024 and 
2025. In this scenario, Copom’s inflation projections stand at 3.8% for 2024, and 3.3% 
for 2025. Inflation projections for administered prices are 4.8% for 2024, and 4.0% for 
2025. 
6. The Committee assesses that the external scenario has become more adverse and 
that the uncertainty regarding the U.S. interest rate cutting cycle and the disinflation 
process in the main economies persists. In this scenario of heightened prospective 
uncertainty, the need for greater caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy is 
reinforced. Regarding the sources of disinflation, the Committee focused to a greater 
extent on the role of monetary policy in the U.S. The Committee noted that the current 
stage of disinflation is more challenging and requires caution in the conduct of 
monetary policy. It was observed that market expectations regarding the monetary 
easing process have shown significant fluctuations, suggesting a broader scenario 
regarding the next steps in the conduct of the U.S. monetary policy. Beyond the broader 
scenario, there has also been a repricing of the cutting cycle in the U.S., with reduction 
in its extension and a postponement of its beginning. Copom reinforced that there is 
no mechanical relationship between the conduct of the U.S. monetary policy and the 
determination of the domestic policy interest rate and that, as usual, it will focus on the 
transmission mechanisms from the external environment to the domestic inflationary 
dynamics. Regarding the speed of disinflation, the Committee discussed the role of the 
U.S. fiscal policy, which tends to reduce the effects of the ongoing monetary tightening, 
and the impact on final prices of the wage pressures resulting from the current labor 
market dynamics. It was also emphasized that a scenario of increased global uncertainty 
suggests greater caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy, due to the 
possible occurrence of more abrupt movements in the prospective scenario. 
7. Over the last few quarters, economic activity data have surprised with higher growth 
rates in different components of demand. It was highlighted the resilience of domestic 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update considers changes since the March Copom meeting (261st 
meeting). 
2 Corresponds to the rounded value of the average exchange rate observed over the ten working days ending 
on the last day of the week prior to the Copom meeting, according to the procedure adopted since the 258th 
meeting. 

 
activity and the sustainability of consumption over time, in contrast to the scenario of 
gradual deceleration originally anticipated by the Committee. Regarding data at the 
margin, it was debated whether the upward revisions, partly explained by 
methodological issues related to seasonal adjustments, really reflected stronger 
activity. The conclusion was that, despite these mitigating factors, activity has in fact 
been stronger over the year.   
8. Copom reinforced its view that the lack of commitment to structural reforms and 
fiscal discipline, the increase of earmarked credit granting, and the uncertainties about 
the stabilization of the public debt have the potential to raise the neutral interest rate 
of the economy, with harmful impacts on the power of monetary policy and, 
consequently, on the cost of disinflation in terms of activity. 
9. The Committee has followed closely the recent developments on the fiscal side and 
their impacts on monetary policy. The Committee stresses that a credible fiscal policy, 
committed to debt sustainability, contributes to the anchoring of inflation expectations 
and to the reduction in the risk premia of financial assets, therefore impacting monetary 
policy. Although the projections for the primary balance and the debt trajectory have 
not changed significantly, there has been an increase in the risk premium and a 
perception of worsened fiscal situation over the period, according to the respondents 
to the Pre-Copom Questionnaire. The Committee then discussed possible reasons for 
the recent deanchoring of inflation expectations, listing the main factors as follows: (i) 
the deterioration of the external scenario; (ii) recent fiscal policy announcements; and 
(iii) the perception of economic agents regarding the monetary authority's 
commitment to achieving the target over the years.  More importantly, the Committee 
unanimously believes that the reanchoring of inflation expectations should be pursued, 
regardless of the sources of the currently observed deanchoring. Reanchoring inflation 
expectations is seen as an essential element to ensure the inflation convergence to the 
target. The Committee believes that reducing expectations requires a firm action by the 
monetary authority, as well as continuous strengthening of the credibility and 
reputation of both the institutions and the fiscal and monetary frameworks that make 
up the Brazilian economic policy. The Committee will not shy away from its commitment 
of reaching the inflation target and understands the fundamental role of expectations 
in the inflation dynamics.  
10. Copom reinforces that there are recurring surprises pointing to high dynamism in 
the labor market, which manifests itself in multiple dimensions. Firstly, expectations for 
the unemployment rate collected by the Focus Survey, both in the short and medium 
term, have been falling over the last few quarters. Moreover, formal jobs creation 
remains at strong levels and there is still a high proportion of voluntary layoffs. In 
addition, the participation rate, and other alternative measures – broken down by 
sector, demography, or region – corroborate a tight labor market scenario. The debate 
therefore focused on the possible transmission of the tightness in the labor market to 
wages and prices. The dynamics of employment and wages were highlighted, recalling 
the fundamental role of the labor market in determining the output gap and the 
prospective path of inflation. Labor-intensive services inflation, which has been 
persistently above the level compatible with meeting the target, was pointed out as 
preliminary evidence. On the other hand, it was mentioned that there is no conclusive 
evidence yet about the labor market impact on inflation. Finally, the combination of 
stronger activity and labor market has led to reassessments of the output gap level.  
11. Despite restrictive monetary conditions, Copom emphasized that the cycle of 
monetary easing is already being transmitted to the credit market, in line with what was 
expected. Some members emphasized, however, that the recent increase of longer-
term rates could result in lower credit market dynamics. These members highlighted 
the importance of longer vertices in the yield curve in the determination of credit supply 
and demand. 
12. Copom evaluated that data relative to current inflation are benign, both in terms of 

 
the headline index and inflation core measures. After a sequence of upward surprises, 
inflation core measures slowed down, although remaining above the target. Some 
members showed greater concern with food inflation in the short term, while others 
continued stressing the role of services inflation. The tragedy in Rio Grande do Sul, in 
addition to its humanitarian impacts, will also affect the economy. Copom will continue 
to monitor the situation.   
13. Copom concluded by assessing that the inflation outlook has become more 
challenging, with the increase of medium-term inflation projections, even conditioned 
to a higher interest rate. Benign surprises were noted in the recent period, but also 
rising projections for shorter periods, involving market and administered prices. In the 
end, it was unanimously concluded that a more contractionary and more cautious 
monetary policy was needed to reinforce the disinflationary dynamics. 
14. The Committee emphasizes that risks to its scenarios remain in both directions. 
Among the upside risks for the inflationary scenario and inflation expectations, it should 
be emphasized (i) a greater persistence of global inflationary pressures; and (ii) a 
stronger-than-expected resilience of services inflation due to a tighter output gap.  
Among the downside risks, it should be noted (i) a greater-than-projected deceleration 
of global economic activity; and (ii) an impact on global inflation larger than expected 
from synchronized monetary policy tightening. The Committee judges that the 
domestic and international environments should remain more uncertain, requiring 
greater caution on the conduct of monetary policy. Some members noted merit in the 
debate about an asymmetrical balance of risks tilted to the upside. These members 
deemed that, besides the persistent and high uncertainty of domestic and international 
outlooks, the weight of upside factors, at this moment, is higher than that from 
downside factors, therefore judging that the balance of risks is asymmetric. For those 
members, the resilience of activity and the strength of the labor market suggest lower 
elasticity of the output gap to the monetary policy, which could lead to an even slower 
disinflation process. 
 
C) Discussion of the conduct of monetary policy 
15. Copom then discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of 
projections evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for the prospective inflation. 
16. The debate began with the analysis of the objective dimensions that guide the 
decisions in the inflation-targeting regime. Firstly, despite an upward interest trajectory 
collected by the Focus survey, used in the reference scenario, projected inflation 
increased for the relevant monetary policy horizon. Similarly, inflation expectations for 
the same horizon, which were unanchored at a stable level over the last quarters, have 
increased since the previous meeting. Also, the labor market and activity scenarios have 
shown dynamism greater than expected by Copom. Finally, the external scenario was 
deemed more adverse, requiring greater caution in the conduct of monetary policy.   
17. After the scenario analysis, most Copom members assessed that it was appropriate 
to reduce the Selic rate by 0.25 percentage points. For this, they evaluated that the 
expected scenario has not materialized due to the additional deanchoring of 
expectations, increased inflation projections, the more adverse external scenario, and 
greater-than-expected economic activity dynamics. For those members, the forward 
guidance indicated in the previous meeting had always been conditional and there has 
been a change in the scenario compared with what was expected. They stressed that 
much more important than the possible reputational cost of not following some 
guidance, even if conditional, is the risk of loss of credibility about the commitment to 
fighting inflation and anchoring expectations. In view of the analysis, these members 
considered that a reduction of 0.25 percentage points was more appropriate to achieve 
the inflation target in the relevant horizon. 

 
18. The members who voted for a reduction of 0.50 percentage points in the Selic rate 
also shared the perception of increased internal and external uncertainties between 
the meetings of March and May, which have already been discussed here. They also 
share the firm commitment to the fundamental goal of achieving the target and 
reanchoring expectations. The debate proposed by these members focused on the 
opportunity cost of not following the guidance vis-a-vis the change in the scenario in 
the period. As in the debates that occurred in other meetings, such members discussed 
whether the prospective scenario diverged significantly from what was expected to the 
point of being worth the reputational cost of not following the guidance, which could 
lead to a reduction in the power of the Committee's formal communications. For these 
members, it was deemed appropriate, as in previous meetings, to follow the guidance, 
but reaffirming the firm commitment to the target and the required terminal interest 
rate to achieve the Committee’s primary objective of inflation convergence to the 
target. They emphasized that extracting the underlying trend from the inflation 
dynamics in an uncertain environment is difficult, but it should by no means be confused 
with leniency towards the indicators released in the period, particularly inflation 
expectations. Strengthening the analysis, they noted that inflation projections were 
more affected by the determination of the terminal interest rate and that the reduction 
of 0.50 percentage points would keep monetary policy sufficiently contractionary. 
Finally, this group also emphasized the need for flexibility in the decisions as of June, 
which would allow, in view of the new set of information, to adequately calibrate the 
path of the monetary policy instrument.  
19. All members agreed that the adoption of a tighter and more cautious monetary 
policy and with no indications about future movements was more appropriate in view 
of the uncertain global scenario and the domestic scenario marked by activity resilience 
and unanchored expectations. The Committee also stressed that monetary policy must 
remain contractionary and that the terminal interest rate will be the one that 
consolidates not only the disinflation process but also the anchoring of inflation 
expectations around the targets. Finally, all members corroborated the understanding 
that the extension and adequacy of future interest rate changes will be determined by 
the firm commitment of achieving the convergence of inflation to the target.  
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
20. Considering the evolution of the disinflationary process, the assessed scenarios, the 
balance of risks, and the broad array of available information, Copom decided to reduce 
the Selic rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 10.50% p.a., and judges that this decision is 
consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level around its target 
throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy, which includes 2025.  Without 
compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also 
implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full employment. 
21. The current context, characterized by a stage in which the disinflationary process 
tends to be slower, deanchored inflation expectations, and a challenging global 
outlook, requires serenity and moderation in the conduct of monetary policy.  
22. The Committee unanimously judges that the uncertain global scenario and the 
domestic scenario, marked by resilient economic activity and deanchored expectations, 
require greater caution. The Committee also stresses that monetary policy should 
continue being contractionary until the consolidation of both the disinflation process 
and the anchoring of expectations around the targets. The Committee also reinforces, 
with special emphasis, that the extension and adequacy of future changes in the 
interest rate will be determined by the firm commitment of reaching the inflation 
target in the relevant horizon. 
23. The following members of the Committee voted for a reduction of 0.25 percentage 
points: Roberto de Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Carolina de Assis Barros, Diogo 

 
Abry Guillen, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, and Renato Dias de Brito Gomes. The following 
members voted for a reduction of 0.50 percentage points: Ailton de Aquino Santos, 
Gabriel Muricca Galípolo, Paulo Picchetti, and Rodrigo Alves Teixeira. 
