 
A) Update of the economic outlook and the Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment remains challenging, due to the inflection point of the 
economic cycle in the United States, which poses questions about the pace of economic 
deceleration, disinflation and, consequently, about the Fed’s monetary policy stance. 
2. The central banks of major economies remain committed to bringing inflation back 
to its targets in a context characterized by labor market pressures. The Committee 
judges that the external environment, also marked by less synchrony in monetary policy 
cycles across countries, continues to require caution from emerging market economies. 
3. Regarding the domestic scenario, the set of indicators on economic activity and labor 
market has been exhibiting more strength than expected by Copom, which led to a 
reassessment regarding the output gap as being positive. 
4. Headline inflation measured by the Extended National Consumer Price Index (IPCA) 
as well as various measures of underlying inflation are above the inflation target in 
recent releases. Inflation expectations for 2024 and 2025 collected by the Focus survey 
are around 4.4% and 4.0%, respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
5. In the reference scenario, the interest rate path is extracted from the Focus survey, 
and the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 5.602 and evolves according to the purchasing 
power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the 
futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year. 
Moreover, the energy tariff flag is assumed to be “yellow” in December of years 2024 
and 2025.  
6. In the reference scenario, Copom's projections are for disinflation, but with inflation 
still above the target of 3.0% in the current relevant monetary policy horizon. The four-
quarter inflation projection for the first quarter of 2026 is 3.5% (Table 1). Inflation 
projections for the calendar years 2024 and 2025 are 4.3% and 3.7%, respectively.  
7. The external environment remains challenging but appears more benign than in the 
previous meeting. Regarding the U.S., high uncertainty persists about the degree of 
easing of labor market pressures and of the economic activity slowdown. It is perceived 
that the U.S. economy is at an inflection point, where, naturally, extracting the 
underlying trends of employment and activity variables is more difficult. In any case, the 
Committee’s reference scenario is of a gradual and orderly slowdown of the U.S. 
economy. The Committee also discussed the Chinese slowdown and changes in 
commodity prices. In addition, the disinflationary process has continued in several 
countries, although challenges that should not be underestimated to bring inflation 
back to the target remain. In this regard, it was noted that, after a global inflationary 
shock that led to a correlated response from central banks, the specific dimensions of 
each economy have played a greater role, leading to a lower correlation of monetary 
policy cycles across countries.  
8. The response of economic policies in several countries to this scenario has also been 
challenging. On the one hand, the Committee highlighted the role of fiscal policies as 
drivers of demand after the pandemic but stressed that the scope for fiscal policy has 
become more limited with the increase in public debt and concerns about fiscal 
sustainability. On the other hand, monetary policies, in such an uncertain environment, 
remain reactive and data-dependent in most countries, also causing inherent volatility 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update considers changes since the July Copom meeting (264th 
meeting). 
2 Corresponds to the rounded value of the average exchange rate observed over the ten working days ending 
on the last day of the week prior to the Copom meeting, according to the procedure adopted since the 258th 
meeting. 

 
to the markets, as observed during the recent period. Furthermore, the Committee 
reinforced that the central banks' commitment to achieving their targets is a 
fundamental ingredient in the disinflationary process, corroborated by recent 
indications of cautious monetary policy cycles in several countries.  
9. The BRL exchange rate has shown volatility in the period, reflecting the various 
changes in the domestic and international scenarios. Copom reinforced that there is no 
mechanical relationship between the conduct of the U.S. monetary policy and the 
determination of the domestic policy interest rate, nor between the exchange rate and 
the domestic determination of the interest rate. As usual, the Committee will focus on 
the transmission mechanisms from the external environment to the domestic inflation 
dynamics and their impact on the outlook. It was also emphasized that a context of 
greater global uncertainty and more abrupt exchange rate movements requires greater 
caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy. 
10. The Committee continues to assess that the domestic economic activity and the 
labor market have been more dynamic than expected, leading to a reassessment of the 
output gap to a positive value. Several members emphasized that the activity dynamics 
in the recent period has been highly relevant, highlighting the surprises for the 
Committee and for market analysts, as portrayed in the Focus survey. This activity 
growth pace, in the context of an output gap that is now considered positive, makes 
more challenging the process of inflation convergence to the target. The combination 
of a robust labor market, expansionary fiscal policy, and vigorous lending to households 
continue to support consumption and, consequently, aggregate demand. In a nutshell, 
in light of the updating of activity data for the period and of the models presented, the 
Committee concluded that the output gap is in positive territory.  
11. The Committee noticed a persistent dynamism in the labor market, with real wage 
gains in recent months. As there is no evidence of a significant increase in productivity, 
these gains could reflect pressures on the labor market. In this regard, some members 
emphasized the evidence of lack of job supply in some sectors. The potential impact of 
the labor market on inflation was then discussed. It was argued that there is no evidence 
yet of wage pressures on prices, but that real wage growth, if persistent and 
outstripping productivity gains, will end up having an impact on prices. The Committee 
realizes, however, that the timing and magnitude of this transmission channel remain 
uncertain. 
12. Copom reinforced its view that the slowdown in structural reform efforts and fiscal 
discipline, the increase in earmarked credit, and uncertainties over the public debt 
stabilization have the potential to raise the economy's neutral interest rate, with 
deleterious impacts on the power of monetary policy and, consequently, on the cost of 
disinflation in terms of activity. 
13. The Committee closely monitors how the recent developments on the fiscal side 
impact monetary policy and financial assets. Moreover, it was noted that the market 
agents' more recent perception about the growth of public spending and the 
sustainability of the current fiscal framework, along with other factors, has had a 
significant impact on asset prices and expectations. A credible fiscal policy, based on 
predictable rules and transparency in its accounts, together with the pursuit of fiscal 
strategies that signal and reinforce the commitment to the fiscal framework in the 
coming years are important elements for anchoring inflation expectations and reducing 
the risk premia of financial assets, consequently impacting monetary policy. Copom 
incorporates in its scenarios a slowdown in the growth rate of public spending over 
time. Synchronous and countercyclical monetary and fiscal policies help ensure price 
stability and, without prejudice to its fundamental objective, smooth out fluctuations in 
the economic activity level and foster full employment. 
14. Deanchoring inflation expectations is a factor of discomfort shared by all 
Committee members. Reanchoring expectations is an essential element in ensuring 

 
that inflation converges to the target at the lowest possible cost in terms of activity. 
Copom believes that the conduct of monetary policy is a fundamental factor in 
reanchoring expectations and will continue to make decisions that safeguard credibility 
and reflect the fundamental role of expectations in inflation dynamics. 
15. The credit cycle continues with volume expansion and interest rates reduction in 
most lines, both in the households and corporate segment. There is greater risk 
appetite in credit supply but the slight worsening in the quality of household credit has 
not yet become an increased materialization of risks. Capital market funding remains 
strong.  
16. The Committee assessed that inflation data suggest a deterioration in the 
composition of inflation, although the aggregate index did not diverge significantly 
from what was expected one quarter ago. The disinflationary process was interrupted 
in the more recent period. Inflation rates for industrial goods and food-at-home grew 
at the margin, possibly reflecting the exchange rate depreciation and a more 
challenging climate scenario. At the same time, services inflation, which has greater 
inertia, plays a major role in the disinflationary dynamics at the current stage. The role 
of labor market dynamics and inflation expectations in determining services inflation 
was then discussed. The Committee concluded that current inflation, measured by the 
headline index or by different core measures, at levels above the target, in a context of 
dynamic economic activity, makes the convergence of inflation to the target more 
challenging. 
17. Copom concluded by assessing that the inflation outlook has become more 
challenging, with the increase of medium-term inflation projections, even conditioned 
on a steeper interest rate path.  
18. The Committee judges that the risks to its inflation scenarios are tilted to the 
upside. Among the upside risks for the inflation outlook and inflation expectations, it 
should be emphasized (i) a more prolonged period of deanchoring of inflation 
expectations; (ii) a stronger-than-expected resilience of services inflation due to a 
tighter output gap; and (iii) a conjunction of internal and external economic policies 
with an inflationary impact, for example, through a persistently more depreciated 
currency. Among the downside risks, it should be noted (i) a greater-than-projected 
deceleration of global economic activity; and (ii) an impact on global inflation larger 
than expected from monetary policy tightening. 
 
C) Discussion of the conduct of monetary policy 
19. Copom then discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of 
projections evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for prospective inflation. The 
Committee focused on three dimensions in its deliberation on the monetary policy 
action to be taken. 
20. Firstly, it assessed that the scenario, marked by resilient economic activity, labor 
market pressures, positive output gap, an increase in the inflation projections, and 
deanchored expectations, requires a more contractionary monetary policy. The 
Committee has outlined its response function over time, making its conduct 
transparent, and will pursue its mandate in full. 
21. Secondly, the Committee considered that the start of the cycle should be gradual 
to, on the one hand, benefit from diligent data monitoring, especially in a context of 
uncertainties, both in external and domestic scenarios, but, on the other hand, allow 
the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy that will enable the convergence of 
inflation back to the target to begin operating. All members agreed to start the 
monetary policy tightening cycle gradually. 
22.  Thirdly, the Committee discussed the pace and magnitude of the interest rate 

 
adjustment, as well as its communication. In view of the uncertainties involved, the 
Committee preferred a communication that reinforced the importance of monitoring 
the scenarios over time, without giving any future indication of its next steps but 
insisting on its firm commitment to the convergence of inflation to the target. 
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
23. The scenario, marked by resilient economic activity, labor market pressures, positive 
output gap, an increase in the inflation projections, and deanchored expectations, 
requires a more contractionary monetary policy. Considering the evolution of the 
disinflationary process, the assessed scenarios, the balance of risks, and the broad array 
of available information, Copom unanimously decided to increase the Selic rate by 0.25 
p.p. to 10.75% p.a., and judges that this decision is consistent with the strategy for 
inflation convergence to a level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for 
monetary policy. Without compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price 
stability, this decision also implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full 
employment. 
24. The pace of future adjustments of the interest rate and the total magnitude of the 
cycle that has just started will be determined by the firm commitment of reaching the 
inflation target and will depend on the inflation dynamics, especially the components 
that are more sensitive to monetary policy and economic activity, on the inflation 
expectations, on the inflation projections, on the output gap, and on the balance of 
risks. 
25. The following members of the Committee voted for this decision: Roberto de 
Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Ailton de Aquino Santos, Carolina de Assis Barros, 
Diogo Abry Guillen, Gabriel Muricca Galípolo, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Picchetti, 
Renato Dias de Brito Gomes, and Rodrigo Alves Teixeira. 
 
 
