 
A) Update of the economic outlook and the Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment remains challenging, due mainly to the economic outlook in 
the United States, which poses questions about the pace of economic deceleration, 
disinflation and, consequently, about the Fed's monetary policy stance. 
2. The central banks of major economies remain committed to bringing inflation back 
to its targets in a context characterized by labor market pressures. The Committee 
judges that the external environment continues to require caution from emerging 
market economies. 
3. Regarding the domestic scenario, the set of indicators on economic activity and labor 
market continues to exhibit strength, as observed in the recent release of GDP, which 
suggests a further widening of the output gap. 
4. Headline inflation and measures of underlying inflation are above the inflation target 
and have increased in recent releases. Inflation expectations for 2024 and 2025 
collected by the Focus survey increased significantly and hover around 4.8% and 4.6%, 
respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
5. The inflation outlook has turned more challenging in several dimensions. The 
Committee initially analyzed economic activity, aggregate demand, inflation 
expectations, current inflation, and the international scenario. Copom then discussed 
inflation projections and expectations before deliberating on the current decision and 
future communication. 
6. Looking at the current economic activity period, a scenario of resilient activity persists 
with greater-than-expected dynamism, as shown in the third quarter GDP release, 
leading to a new reassessment of a more positive gap. The labor market also continues 
to heat up, with an increase in the employed population, a drop in the unemployment 
rate, and increased jobs formalization. Nevertheless, there has been some moderation 
in the pace of wage growth in different surveys, despite remaining at a high level. The 
combination of a robust labor market, expansionary fiscal policy, and vigorous broad 
credit granting continue to support consumption and, consequently, aggregate 
demand. In particular, the pace of growth in household consumption and gross fixed 
capital formation indicates that domestic demand is growing at a fairly strong pace, 
despite the tightening monetary policy. The Committee discussed the reasons for this 
dichotomy. It has been noted that there are mitigating elements concurrent with the 
impact of monetary policy on activity, such as stronger-than-anticipated credit and fiscal 
stimuli. Maintaining unobstructed the monetary policy channels, with no elements 
mitigating their action, contributes to a more effective and efficient conduct. 
7. However, regarding prospective activity, there are elements that suggest a 
slowdown, such as the tightened financial conditions. In any case, the Committee points 
out that the economy has been surprisingly resilient. The Committee will monitor this 
process, understanding that the reduction in the output gap forecast in its projections 
is inherent to the orderly functioning of the transmission mechanisms and the 
achievement of the inflation target. In addition to the uncertainty about the 
deceleration process, the question of whether the expected slowdown is due to a 
restriction in production factors or a drop in demand is still under debate, with highly 
different impacts on the inflationary process. 
8. Along with activity, the credit and, mainly, capital markets have also surprised 
throughout the year, with volume growth above what was expected, despite high 
interest rates. It should be noted that, despite the resilience of activity, an environment 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update considers changes since the November Copom meeting (266th 
meeting). 

 
of high interest rates, with high levels of delinquency and income commitment, requires 
additional caution and diligence when granting credit. 
9. Financial conditions and the exchange rate have undergone a sharp change recently. 
The combination of a more depreciated exchange rate with the rise in the nominal and 
real interest rate curves makes the environment more complex. It was recalled that the 
pass-through of the exchange rate to prices increases when demand is stronger, 
expectations are deanchored, or the exchange rate path is considered more persistent. 
The Committee should therefore monitor more closely how the exchange rate and 
financial conditions are transmitted to prices and activity. 
10. Regarding the economic policy more broadly, the Committee remained firmly 
convinced that policies must be predictable, credible, and counter-cyclical. In particular, 
slowdowns are an essential part of the process of smoothing and rebalancing the 
economy. The Committee's debate once again highlighted the need for harmonious 
fiscal and monetary policies. 
11. The perception of agents about the recent fiscal announcement has significantly 
impacted asset prices and expectations, especially the risk premium, inflation 
expectations, and the exchange rate. In fact, inflation expectations, measured by 
different instruments and obtained from different groups of agents, rose in all time 
horizons, indicating further deanchoring. It is notable that both the inflation premium 
embedded on financial instruments and inflation expectations rose in the period, 
making the inflation scenario more adverse and requiring a more contractionary 
monetary policy. Deanchoring inflation expectations is a factor of discomfort shared by 
all Committee members and must be tamed. 
12. Short-term inflation scenario has deteriorated. Food prices have risen significantly, 
due to, among other factors, the drought observed throughout the year and the rise in 
beef prices, also affected by the cattle cycle. This increase tends to spread over the 
medium-term given the presence of important inertial mechanisms in the Brazilian 
economy. Regarding industrialized goods, the recent exchange rate movement has 
pressured prices and margins, suggesting a greater increase in these components in the 
coming months. Finally, services inflation, which has greater inertia, remains above the 
level required to meet the inflation target in a context of dynamic activity and has 
increased in the most recent readings. In fact, there has been not only an interruption 
in the disinflationary process, but also a greater inflationary pressure in the latest 
readings. Copom emphasized that the inflationary drivers have intensified since the 
previous meeting, such as the more positive output gap, the even more dynamic labor 
market, the additional exchange rate depreciation, higher current inflation, and more 
deanchored inflation expectations, making the convergence of inflation to the target 
more challenging. 
13. The external environment remains challenging, with significant economic and 
geopolitical uncertainties. Regarding the U.S., uncertainty persists about the pace of 
disinflation and of the economic activity slowdown. At the same time, the possibility of 
changes in the conduct of economic policy also brings additional uncertainty to the 
scenario, particularly with possible fiscal stimuli, restrictions on labor supply, and the 
introduction of import tariffs. The Committee’s reference scenario continues to be for 
a gradual and orderly slowdown of the U.S. economy. The Committee reinforced that 
the central banks' commitment to achieving their targets is a fundamental ingredient 
in the disinflationary process, corroborated by recent indications of cautious monetary 
easing cycles in several countries. As usual, the Committee will focus on the 
transmission mechanisms from the external environment to the domestic inflation 
dynamics and their impact on the outlook. Copom also emphasized that a context of 
greater global uncertainty and more abrupt exchange rate movements requires greater 
caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy. 
14. The Committee discussed the estimates of the neutral interest rate that would be 

 
used as an assumption for the projections. The neutral rate is an unobservable variable, 
subject to great uncertainty in its estimation. Due to the intrinsic uncertainty and the 
very nature of the variable, the Committee reinforced that the neutral rate is not a 
variable that should be updated very frequently, nor should it have abrupt movements, 
except in exceptional cases. In this context, the Committee raised the neutral real 
interest rate in its models from 4.75% to 5.00% p.a. and will continue to evaluate this 
assumption. 
15. Copom has assessed that the shorter-term determinants, such as the exchange rate 
and current inflation, as well as the medium-term determinants, such as the output gap 
and inflation expectations have deteriorated. Copom then looked into the projections. 
In the reference scenario, the interest rate path is extracted from the Focus survey, and 
the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 5.952 and evolves according to the purchasing 
power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the 
futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year. 
Moreover, the energy tariff flag is assumed to be “green” in December of years 2024 
and 2025. 
16. In the reference scenario, the four-quarter inflation projection for the second 
quarter of 2026 is 4.0% (Table 1). Inflation projections for the calendar years 2024 and 
2025 are 4.9% and 4.5%, respectively. 
17. Copom reinforced its view that the slowdown in structural reform efforts and fiscal 
discipline, the increase in earmarked credit, and uncertainties over the public debt 
stabilization have the potential to raise the economy's neutral interest rate, with 
deleterious impacts on the power of monetary policy and, consequently, on the cost of 
disinflation in terms of activity. 
18. Due to the materialization of risks, the Committee judges that the scenario is less 
uncertain and more adverse than in the previous meeting. Upside inflation risks, such 
as the resilience of services inflation, the deanchoring of expectations, and exchange 
rate depreciation, have materialized. As a result, a scenario that until then had been 
quite uncertain has become more adverse. 
19. However, the risks to its inflation scenarios remain tilted to the upside. Among the 
upside risks for the inflation outlook and inflation expectations, it should be 
emphasized (i) a more prolonged period of deanchoring of inflation expectations; (ii) a 
stronger-than-expected resilience of services inflation due to a more positive output 
gap; and (iii) a conjunction of internal and external economic policies with an 
inflationary impact, for example, through a persistently more depreciated currency. 
Among the downside risks, it should be noted (i) a greater-than-projected deceleration 
of global economic activity; and (ii) an impact on global inflation larger than expected 
from monetary policy tightening. 
 
C) Discussion of the conduct of monetary policy 
20. Copom then discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of 
projections evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for prospective inflation. 
21. The Committee assessed that a further deterioration in the inflation scenario has 
occurred, as reflected in inflation expectations and projections. It concluded that the 
shorter-term determinants – such as the exchange rate and current inflation – and the 
medium-term determinants – such as the output gap and inflation expectations – have 
deteriorated significantly. This worsening calls for an even more contractionary 
monetary policy. 
 
2 It corresponds to the rounded value of the average exchange rate observed over the ten working days 
ending on the last day of the week prior to the Copom meeting, according to the procedure adopted since 
the 258th meeting. 

 
22. The Committee then unanimously decided to increase the Selic rate by 1.00 p.p. and 
to announce that, if the expected scenario confirms, it anticipates an adjustment of the 
same magnitude at the next two meetings. In the discussion that led to this decision, 
two dimensions were discussed at length. Firstly, the magnitude of the short- and 
medium-term deterioration in the inflation scenario required a more timely policy 
action to maintain the firm commitment to converging inflation to the target. Secondly, 
several risks have materialized, making the scenario more adverse but less uncertain, 
allowing the Committee to have greater visibility and then to provide an indication of 
how it anticipated the next decisions. 
23. The total magnitude of the tightening cycle will be determined by the firm 
commitment of reaching the inflation target and will depend on the inflation dynamics, 
especially the components that are more sensitive to economic activity and monetary 
policy, on the inflation projections, on the inflation expectations, on the output gap, 
and on the balance of risks. 
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
24. The current scenario is marked by additional deanchoring of inflation expectations, 
an increase of inflation projections, a stronger-than-expected economic activity, and 
further widening of the output gap, which requires an even more contractionary 
monetary policy. 
25. Copom therefore decided to increase the Selic rate by 1.00 p.p. to 12.25% p.a., and 
judges that this decision is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a 
level around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy. Without 
compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also 
implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full employment. 
26. In light of a more adverse scenario for inflation convergence, the Committee 
anticipates further adjustments of the same magnitude in the next two meetings, if the 
scenario evolves as expected. The total magnitude of the tightening cycle will be 
determined by the firm commitment of reaching the inflation target and will depend 
on the inflation dynamics, especially the components that are more sensitive to 
economic activity and monetary policy, on the inflation projections, on the inflation 
expectations, on the output gap, and on the balance of risks. 
27. The following members of the Committee voted for this decision: Roberto de 
Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Ailton de Aquino Santos, Carolina de Assis Barros, 
Diogo Abry Guillen, Gabriel Muricca Galípolo, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Picchetti, 
Renato Dias de Brito Gomes, and Rodrigo Alves Teixeira. 
 
Table 1 
Inflation projections in the reference scenario 
Year-over-year IPCA change (%) 
Price Index 
2024 
2025 
2026Q2 
IPCA 
4.9 
4.5 
4.0 
IPCA market prices 
5.0 
4.5 
3.8 
IPCA administered prices 
4.6 
4.5 
4.6 
 
