 
A) Update of the economic outlook and the Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment is adverse and particularly uncertain due to the economic 
policy and economic outlook in the United States, regarding mainly its trade policy and 
its effects.  
2. The trade policy has added uncertainties to the global economy, particularly 
regarding the extent of the economic slowdown and the heterogeneous effects on the 
inflation outlook across countries, significantly impacting the conduct of monetary 
policy. 
3. In addition, the behavior and the volatility of different asset classes have also been 
impacted, significantly altering global financial conditions. This scenario continues to 
require caution from emerging market economies amid greater geopolitical tension. 
4. Regarding the domestic scenario, the set of indicators on economic activity and labor 
market is still exhibiting strength, even though we observe an incipient moderation in 
growth. 
5. In recent releases, headline inflation and measures of underlying inflation remained 
above the inflation target. Inflation expectations for 2025 and 2026 collected by the 
Focus survey remained above the inflation target and stand at 5.5% and 4.5%, 
respectively. 
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
6. The inflation outlook remains challenging in several dimensions. Copom assessed the 
international scenario, economic activity, aggregate demand, inflation expectations, 
and current inflation. Copom then discussed inflation projections and expectations 
before deliberating on the current decision and future communication. 
7. The global environment is adverse and particularly uncertain. The impacts of the 
tariffs shock and the uncertainty shock, despite all measurement attempts, are still 
highly uncertain. Layers of uncertainty involve the U.S. tariff policy determination itself, 
the tariff response of other countries to the U.S. tariff policy, the response of firms to 
these policies, with possible impacts on global production chains, and consumers’ 
response to price changes. The scenario has been therefore much more uncertain, 
which has already led to changes in investment and consumption decisions. It is still 
early to conclude what the magnitude of the impact will be on the domestic economy. 
On the one hand, it seems less affected by the recent tariffs than other countries, but, 
on the other, it is impacted by an adverse global scenario. Furthermore, the global 
financial conditions that will prevail will be particularly important amid an environment 
with magnified economic and geopolitical uncertainties. Copom’s baseline scenario of 
the latest meetings already assumed two axes: increased uncertainty and deterioration 
of the global growth scenario, with a gradual and orderly deceleration of the U.S. 
economy. Both vertices have deteriorated and deepened. Uncertainty has become 
much higher than expected, and the U.S. economy is now expected to slow down more 
sharply than previously forecasted. Another relevant development refers to the 
dilemmas faced by the conduct of U.S. monetary policy resulting from the effects of the 
tariff policy, with a concomitant increase in the prices level and a reduction in the pace 
of activity growth. The Committee reinforced that the central banks' commitment to 
achieving their targets is a fundamental ingredient in the disinflationary process, 
corroborated by recent indications of cautious monetary easing cycles in several 
countries and the focus on anchoring expectations. As usual, the Committee will focus 
on the transmission mechanisms from the external environment to the domestic 
inflation dynamics and their impact on the outlook. It was also emphasized that a 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update considers changes since the March Copom meeting (269th 
meeting). 

 
context of greater global uncertainty and more abrupt exchange rate movements 
requires greater caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy. 
8. The activity outlook is still characterized by mixed signs regarding the activity 
deceleration, although an incipient growth moderation is observed. This is not 
divergent from the Copom’s baseline scenario, which involves a turnaround in the 
current period for then reducing dynamism in the subsequent quarters. The Committee 
continues to evaluate that the prospective baseline scenario involves a slowdown in 
economic activity, which is part of the monetary policy transmission process and an 
element necessary for the convergence of inflation to the target. The Committee 
reiterates that the aggregate demand slowdown is an essential element of supply-
demand rebalancing in the economy and inflation convergence to the target. Some of 
the factors listed during the meeting continue to give the Committee confidence that 
the growth moderation process should take place, after several years of surprising 
dynamism. 
9. The significantly contractionary monetary policy has already contributed and will 
continue contributing to the growth moderation. The Committee assessed the several 
monetary policy channels and assesses that the restrictive monetary policy has already 
had effects on the credit market, business surveys, the exchange rate market, corporate 
balance sheets, as well as in the moderation of certain activity and labor market 
indicators. Such impacts are expected and required for the convergence of inflation to 
the target. In view of the lags inherent to the monetary policy mechanisms, these 
effects are expected to deepen in the coming quarters. Particularly regarding credit, 
some inflection is already observed in some lines and, in the case of households, an 
increased debt-to-service ratio may be anticipating lower credit demand. It was 
emphasized again that building the required confidence to set the appropriate degree 
of monetary restriction over time requires that monetary policy channels are 
unobstructed and with no elements mitigating their action. For the fulfillment of its 
mandate and the convergence of inflation to the target at the lowest cost, monetary 
policy must be able to act with all channels unobstructed. 
10. Another factor that has contributed to the activity dynamism in recent years has 
been the labor market. Both from the perspective of income – with real gains above 
productivity – and employment – with an increase in the employment level and a 
significant decrease in the unemployment rate to historically low levels – the labor 
market has greatly supported consumption and income. It was emphasized that the 
labor market inflection is also part of the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy 
and is expected to deepen over time, consistently with a restrictive monetary policy 
scenario. 
11. Finally, as mentioned earlier, the credit market has also remained buoyant in recent 
quarters due to the dynamism of the labor market and economic activity, contributing 
to the dynamism of activity. Recently, in line with the current scenario of tighter 
financial conditions and higher risk premia, bank credit has shown inflection, with an 
increase in interest rates, lower risk appetite in the credit supply, and a slower pace of 
credit granting. Copom incorporated into its baseline scenario some impact of the 
changes in the private payroll-deducted loans on growth, but mostly through an 
increase of disposable income from debt swap, which has a milder effect on the 
aggregate projection. There is still much uncertainty about the full effect of the 
program, so far in its early stages. Therefore, the Committee will monitor data carefully 
to refine the estimated impacts on the credit market and on activity. This measure 
should not be interpreted as a cyclical measure and possibly represents a structural 
market change. In any case, in the conduct of monetary policy, such measures will be 
duly incorporated to properly determine the required monetary restriction for inflation 
to converge to the target.  
12. A significant stimulus in recent years has come from fiscal policy. Copom assesses 
that a fiscal policy that contributes to the reduction in the risk premium and with a 

 
countercyclical action contributes to the convergence of inflation to the target. In 
addition, agents' perception about the fiscal regime and debt sustainability continues 
to impact asset prices and agent's expectations. Copom continues using the fiscal policy 
as an input in its assessment and, given the current and future fiscal policies, will adopt 
the appropriate conduct of monetary policy for the convergence of inflation to the 
target. Copom reinforced its view that the slowdown in structural reform efforts and 
fiscal discipline, the increase in earmarked credit, and uncertainties over the public debt 
stabilization have the potential to raise the economy's neutral interest rate, with 
deleterious impacts on the power of monetary policy and, consequently, on the cost of 
disinflation in terms of activity. While analyzing activity, the Committee remained firmly 
convinced that policies must be predictable, credible, and countercyclical. In particular, 
the Committee's debate once again highlighted the need for harmonious fiscal and 
monetary policies. 
13. Inflation expectations, measured by different instruments and obtained from 
different groups of agents, remained above the inflation target at all horizons, making 
the inflation scenario more adverse. Deanchored inflation expectations is a factor of 
discomfort shared by all Committee members and must be tamed. Copom highlighted 
that environments with deanchored expectations increase the disinflation cost in terms 
of activity. The scenario of inflation convergence to the target becomes more 
challenging with deanchored expectations for longer horizons. When discussing 
inflation expectations, the main conclusion obtained and shared by all members of 
Copom was that, in an environment of deanchored expectations, greater monetary 
restriction is required for a longer period than would be otherwise appropriate.  
14. Short-term inflation scenario remains adverse. Services inflation, which has greater 
inertia, remains above the level required to meet the inflation target, in a context of a 
positive output gap. Regarding industrialized goods, the exchange rate movement to 
more depreciated levels has pressured prices and margins, already materialized in a rise 
in wholesale prices and now affecting retail prices. Food prices remain high and tend to 
spread over other prices on the medium term given the presence of inertial mechanisms 
in the Brazilian economy. Beyond the changes in items, or even short-term oscillations, 
Copom assessed that core inflation measures have remained above the value consistent 
with the target achievement for months, corroborating the interpretation that inflation 
is pressured by demand. 
15. Copom then addressed the projections. In the reference scenario, the interest rate 
path is extracted from the Focus survey, and the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 5.702 
and evolves according to the purchasing power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes 
that oil prices follow approximately the futures market curve for the following six 
months and then start increasing 2% per year. Moreover, the energy tariff flag is 
assumed to be “green” in December of the years 2025 and 2026. 
16. In the reference scenario, four-quarter inflation projections for 2025 and for 2026 – 
the current relevant monetary policy horizon – are 4.8% and 3.6%, respectively (Table 1).  
17. As for the balance of risks, all members judged that the risks previously outlined by 
the Committee were relevant throughout the period and are still relevant in the current 
outlook. In addition, it was assessed that the scenario of greater uncertainty increased 
both upside and downside inflation risks for the inflation outlook, with a debate as to 
whether it still remained slightly asymmetrical, but less asymmetrical than in the 
previous meeting, or whether it could already be defined as neutral. Copom assessed 
that, among the upside risks for the inflation outlook and inflation expectations, it 
should be emphasized (i) a more prolonged period of deanchoring of inflation 
expectations; (ii) a stronger-than-expected resilience of services inflation due to a more 
 
2 It corresponds to the rounded value of the average exchange rate observed over the ten working days 
ending on the last day of the week prior to the Copom meeting, according to the procedure adopted since 
the 258th meeting. 

 
positive output gap; and (iii) a conjunction of internal and external economic policies 
with a stronger-than-expected inflationary impact, for example, through a persistently 
more depreciated currency. Among the downside risks, it should be noted (i) a greater-
than-projected deceleration of domestic economic activity, impacting the inflation 
scenario; (ii) a steeper global slowdown stemming from the trade shock and the 
scenario of heightened uncertainty; and (iii) a reduction in commodity prices with 
disinflationary effects. 
18. Prospectively, the Committee will continue monitoring the pace of economic 
activity, which is a fundamental driver of inflation, particularly services inflation; the 
exchange rate pass-through to inflation, after a process of increased exchange rate 
volatility; and inflation expectations, which remain deanchored and are drivers of future 
inflation behavior. It was emphasized that inflationary vectors remain adverse, such as 
the economic activity resilience and labor market pressures, deanchored inflation 
expectations and higher inflation projections. This scenario prescribes a significantly 
contractionary monetary policy for a prolonged period to assure the convergence of 
inflation to the target. 
 
C) Discussion of the conduct of monetary policy 
19. Copom then discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of 
projections evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for prospective inflation.  
20. In line with the previous meeting, the Committee opted for an increase of 0.50 p.p., 
maintaining the way of analysis and response that it has conducted over time and has 
outlined in its communication. Copom noticed that expectations continued 
deanchored, inflation projections continued high, economic activity continued resilient, 
and the labor market, pressured.  
21. Regarding the next meeting, the Committee assessed that the scenario of 
heightened uncertainty, combined with the advanced stage of the current monetary 
policy cycle and its cumulative impacts yet to be observed, requires additional caution 
in the monetary policy action and flexibility to incorporate data that impact the inflation 
outlook.  
22. The Committee will remain vigilant and the calibration of the appropriate 
tightening of the monetary policy will continue to be guided by the objective of bringing 
inflation back to the target in the relevant horizon. This calibration will depend on the 
inflation dynamics, especially the components that are more sensitive to monetary 
policy and economic activity, on the inflation projections, on the inflation expectations, 
on the output gap, and on the balance of risks. 
 
D) Monetary policy decision 
23. The external environment, in particular the U.S. trade policy, and the domestic 
environment, particularly the fiscal policy, have been influencing the behavior of asset 
prices and expectations. The Committee continues to monitor closely how the 
developments on the fiscal side impact monetary policy and financial assets. The 
current scenario continues to be marked by deanchored inflation expectations, high 
inflation projections, resilience on economic activity and labor market pressures. This 
scenario prescribes a significantly contractionary monetary policy for a prolonged 
period to assure the convergence of inflation to the target. 
24. Copom decided to increase the Selic rate by 0.50 p.p. to 14.75% p.a., and judges 
that this decision is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level 
around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy. Without 
compromising its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also 
implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full employment. 

 
25. For the next meeting, the scenario of heightened uncertainty, combined with the 
advanced stage of the current monetary policy cycle and its cumulative impacts yet to 
be observed, requires additional caution in the monetary policy action and flexibility to 
incorporate data that impact the inflation outlook. 
26. The Committee will remain vigilant and the calibration of the appropriate 
tightening of the monetary policy will continue to be guided by the objective of bringing 
inflation back to the target in the relevant horizon. This calibration will depend on the 
inflation dynamics, especially the components that are more sensitive to monetary 
policy and economic activity, on the inflation projections, on the inflation expectations, 
on the output gap, and on the balance of risks. 
27. The following members of the Committee voted for this decision: Gabriel Muricca 
Galípolo (Governor), Ailton de Aquino Santos, Diogo Abry Guillen, Gilneu Francisco 
Astolfi Vivan, Izabela Moreira Correa, Nilton José Schneider David, Paulo Picchetti, 
Renato Dias de Brito Gomes, and Rodrigo Alves Teixeira. 
 
Table 1 
Inflation projections in the reference scenario 
Year-over-year IPCA change (%) 
 
Price Index 
2025 
2026 
IPCA 
4.8 
3.6 
IPCA market prices 
5.3 
3.4 
IPCA administered prices 
3.5 
4.0 
 
