1    bcb.gov.br  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Minutes of the Meeting of the  
Monetary Policy Committee — Copom  
June 17 -18, 2025 271st
 
271st Meeting  
COPOM  
June 17 -18 
2 bcb.gov.br  Copom members analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and 
international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to achieve the inflation target set by the National Monetary Council.  Date:  June 17 -18, 2025  
Place:  BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8th floor (6/17 and 6/18 on the morning) 
and 20th floor (6/18 on the afternoon) – Brasilia – DF – Brazil  
Starting and ending 
times:  June 17: 10:11 AM – 11:56 AM; 2:32 PM – 6:16 PM  
June 18: 10:10 AM – 11:11 AM; 2:36 PM – 6:32 PM  
In attendance:  
Copom Members   Gabriel Muricca Galípolo – Governor  
Ailton de Aquino Santos  
Diogo Abry Guillen  
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan  
Izabela Moreira Correa  
Nilton José Schneider David  
Paulo Picchetti  
Renato Dias de Brito Gomes  
Rodrigo Alves Teixeira  
Department Heads in 
charge of technical 
presentations (attending 
on 6/17 and on the 
morning of 6/18):  André Minella – Research Department (also attending on the afternoon of 6/18)  
André de Oliveira Amante – Open Market Operations Department  
Fábio Martins Trajano de Arruda – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System  
Luís Guilherme Siciliano Pontes – International Reserves Department  
Marcelo Antonio Thomaz de Aragão – Department of International Affairs  
Ricardo Sabbadini – Department of Economics  
Other participants  Alexandre de Carvalho – Office of Economic Advisor  
(attending on 6/17 and  André Maurício Trindade da Rocha – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department  
on the morning of 6/18):  Arnaldo José Giongo Galvão – Press Office Advisor  
Edson Broxado de França Teixeira – Head of Office of the Deputy Go vernor f or Supervision 
Eduardo José Araújo Lima – Head of Office of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy  
Erasto Villa Verde de Carvalho Filho – General Counsel  
Euler Pereira Gonçalves de Mello – Deputy Head of the Re search D epartment 
Fernando Augusto Ferreira Lemos – Head  of the De partment o f Stati stics 
Isabela Ribeiro Damas o Maia – Head o f the Sustainability a nd Internati onal  Portfolio Investors 
Unit (present o n the mo rning of 6 /17) 
Julio Cesa r Costa Pinto – Head of Off ice of the Governor 
Laura Soledad Cutruffo Comparin i – Deputy H ead of the Department o f Economics 
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head o f Office of the Deputy Go vernor f or Monetary P olicy 
Mardilson Fernandes Queiroz – Head o f the F inancial System R egulation Department 
Mario Rubem do Coutt o Bast os – Deputy Head o f the D epartment o f Banking O peration s and 
Payments S ystem 
Olavo Lins Romano Pereira – Deputy  Head of the Department o f Inte rnational Affairs 
Ricardo da Costa Martinell i – Deputy Head o f the I nternational Reserves De partment 
Ricardo Franco Moura – Head of the Prudential an d Foreign E xchange Re gulation D epartment  
Rogerio Antonio Lucca – Executive S ecretary 
Simone Miranda Burell o – Advi sor in the Office of the Deputy Go vernor f or Monetary P olicy 
271st Meeting  
COPOM  
June 17 -18 
  
3    bcb.gov.br  A) Update of the economic outlook and the Copom’s scenario1 
1. The global environment remains adverse and particularly uncertain due to the 
economic policy and economic outlook in the United States, mainly regarding its trade 
and fiscal policies and their effects.  
2. In addition, the behavior and the volatility of different asset classes have also been 
impacted, altering global financial conditions. This scenario continues to require caution 
from emerging market economies amid escalation of the geopolitical tension.  
3. Regarding the domestic scenario, the set of indicators on economic activity and labor 
market is still exhibiting some strength, even though we observe some moderation in 
growth.  
4. In recent releases, headline inflation and measures of underlying inflation remained 
above the inflation target. Inflation expectations for 2025 and 2026 collected by the Focus survey remained above the inflation target and stand at 5.2% and 4.5%, 
respecti vely.  
 
B) Scenarios and risk analysis  
5. The inflation outlook remains challenging in several dimensions. Copom assessed the 
international scenario, economic activity, aggregate demand, inflation expectations, 
and current inflation. Copom then discussed inflation projections and expectations 
befo re deliberating on the current decision and future communication.  
6. The global environment has been  adverse and particularly uncertain. The Committee 
assessed that there were some developments that could suggest an improvement in 
the global scenario, such as the partial reversal of tariffs, but the prevailing view 
remained that the international scenari o is still uncertain and volatile. In particular, the 
Committee continues to assess that the uncertainty shock may be significant. It is also 
unclear what the fiscal trajectory will be in the U.S., both in terms of the magnit ude of 
the stimulus and  the final fiscal consolidation. Moreover, the geopolitical conflict in the 
Middle East and its potential consequences for the oil market also add uncertainty to the prospective external environment. This scenario has already led to changes in 
investment an d consumption decisions. It is still early to conclude what the magnitude 
of the impact will be on the domestic economy. On the one hand, it seems less affected by the recent tariffs than other countries, but, on the other, it is im pacted by an adverse 
global scenario.  
7. The global financial conditions that will prevail in this adverse scenario will be 
particularly important, in an environment of heightened economic and geopolitical uncertainty. Once again, the  pattern of asset correlations, including currencies, during 
episodes of risk aversion shocks was unusual . The Committee reinforced that the 
central banks' commitment to achieving their targets is a fundamental ingredient in the 
disinflationary process, corroborated by recent indications of cautious monetary easing 
cycles in several countries and the focus on anchoring expectations. As usual, the 
Committee will focus on the transmission mechanisms from the external environment 
to the domestic inflation dyna mics and their impact on the outlook. It was also 
emphasized that a context of greater global uncertainty and more abrupt exchange rate movements requires greater caution in the conduct of domestic monetary policy.  
8. Domestic economic activity is still characterized by mixed signs regarding the activity 
deceleration but some growth moderation is observed. The release of first -quarter GDP 
data indicated, as expected, strong growth in sectors less sensitive to the econom ic 
cycle, particularly agriculture. There was some moderation in the other sectors, 
although several subsectors still showed a certain degree of dynamism. In this context, 
 
1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update considers changes since the May Copom meeting (270th 
meeting).  
271st Meeting  
COPOM  
June 17 -18 
  
4    bcb.gov.br  there was a partial reversal in household consumption after a decline in the previous 
quarter, along with an expansion in investment. In terms of consumption, resilience may 
be linked to the continued strength of the labor market, which is sustaining a hig h pace 
of income growth, and to the credit market, which has shown signs of inflection but 
remains dynamic. According to the most recent economic activity data, the growth 
moderation process continues, albeit rather gradually. The latest indicators for tra de, 
services, and industry suggest more moderate growth, and confidence indicators 
remain at lower levels, despite some recent reversal. In view of the lags inherent to the 
monetary policy transmission mechanisms, these effects are expected to deepen in th e 
coming quarters. The Committee reiterates that the aggregate demand slowdown is an 
essential element of supply -demand rebalancing in the economy and convergence of 
inflation to the target .  
9. Another factor that has contributed to the activity dynamism in recent years has been 
the labor market. Both from the perspective of income –  with real gains above 
productivity – and employment –  with an increase in the employment level and a 
significant d ecrease in the unemployment rate to historically low levels – the labor 
market has greatly supported consumption and income. The most recent data support 
the interpretation of a dynamic labor market, with significant formal job creation and a 
decline in the unemployment rate. Conversely, there has been some deceleration in 
earnings, but they still remain at a high level, supporting the growth of overall 
household income. It was emphasized that the labor market inflection is also part of the 
transmission mec hanisms of monetary policy and should become more evident and 
stronger over time, consistent with a restrictive monetary policy scenario.  
10. The credit market has also remained buoyant in recent quarters due to the 
dynamism of the labor market and economic activity. Recently, in line with the current 
scenario of tighter financial conditions and higher risk premia, bank credit has shown 
inflecti on, with an increase in the interest rates, lower risk appetite in the credit supply, 
and a slower pace of credit granting. There was a decline in non- earmarked credit 
granting, while earmarked credit granting remained more resilient. In particular, 
regard ing household credit, there has been an increase in the household debt -service 
ratio and a deepening of the negative credit flow –  that is, households repaying more 
debt than taking on.  
11. Fiscal policy has a short- term impact, mainly through stimulating aggregate 
demand, and a medium -term impact, which incorporates the effects of the term 
premium in the yield curve. A fiscal policy that acts countercyclically and contributes to 
reducing the  risk premium favors the convergence of inflation to the target. Thus, the 
recent debate, with an emphasis on the structural dimension of the fiscal budget and the gradual reduction of tax expenditures over time, has potential to influence perceptions of d ebt sustainability and to impact the term premium in the yield curve. 
Copom reinforced its view that the slowdown in structural reform efforts and fiscal 
discipline, the increase in earmarked credit, and uncertainties over the public debt 
stabilization hav e the potential to raise the economy's neutral interest rate, with 
deleterious impacts on the power of monetary policy and, consequently, on the cost of 
disinflation in terms of activity. While analyzing activity, the Committee remained firmly 
convinced th at policies must be predictable, credible, and countercyclical. In particular, 
the Committee’s discussion once again highlighted the need for harmonious fiscal and 
monetary policies.
 
12. Inflation expectations, as measured by different instruments and obtained from 
various groups of agents, remained above the inflation target at all horizons, making the inflation outlook more adverse. For shorter -term horizons, following the release of 
the most recent data, there has been a decline in inflation expectations. For longer -
term horizons, however, there has been no significant change between Copom meetings. Deanchored inflation expectations is a factor of discomfort shared by all 
Committee membe rs and must be tamed. Copom highlighted that environments with 
271st Meeting  
COPOM  
June 17 -18 
  
5    bcb.gov.br  deanchored expectations increase the disinflation cost in terms of activity. The scenario 
of inflation convergence to the target becomes more challenging with deanchored 
expectations for longer horizons. When discussing this topic, the main conclusion 
obta ined and shared by all members of Copom was that, in an environment of 
deanchored expectations – as currently is the case –  greater monetary restriction is 
required for a longer period than would be otherwise appropriate.  
13. The short -term inflation scenario remains adverse but has shown downside 
surprises compared with analysts’ forecasts. Industrial goods inflation, which had 
already shown weaker wholesale price pressures, continued to ease in the most recent 
period. Food pr ices also displayed slightly weaker -than- expected dynamics. Finally, 
services inflation, which has greater inertia, remains above the level required to meet 
the inflation target, in a context of a positive output gap. Beyond the changes in items, 
or even short -term oscillations, Copom assessed that core inflation measures have 
remained above the value consistent with the target achievement for months, 
corroborating the interpretation that inflation is pressured by demand and requires a 
contractionary moneta ry policy for a very prolonged period.  
14. Copom then addressed the projections. In the reference scenario, the interest rate 
path is extracted from the Focus survey, and the exchange rate starts at USD/BRL 5.602 
and evolves according to the purchasing power parity (PPP). The Committee assumes that oil prices follow approximately the futures market curve for the following six months and then start increasing 2% per year onwards. Moreover, the energy tariff flag 
is assumed to be “green” in December of the years 2025 and 2026.  
15. In the reference scenario, four -quarter inflation projections for 2025 and 2026 – the 
current relevant monetary policy horizon –  are 4.9% and 3.6%, respectively (Table 1).  
16. Regarding the balance of risks, it was assessed that the scenario of greater 
uncertainty  continues to present higher -than -usual upside and downside risks to the 
inflation outlook. Copom assessed that, among the upside risks for the inflation outlook 
and inflation expectations, it should be emphasized (i) a more prolonged period of deanchoring  of inflation expectations; (ii) a stronger -than- expected resilience of 
services inflation due to a more positive output gap; and (iii) a conjunction of internal 
and external economic policies with a stronger -than- expected inflationary impact, for 
example, through a persistently more depreciated currency. Among the downside risks, 
it should be noted (i) a greater -than -projected deceleration of domestic economic 
activity, impacting the inflation scenario; (ii) a steeper global slowdown stemming from 
the trad e shock and the scenario of heightened uncertainty; and (iii) a reduction in 
commodity prices with disinflationary effects.  
17. Prospectively, the Committee will continue monitoring the pace of economic 
activity, which is a fundamental driver of inflation, particularly services inflation; the 
exchange rate pass -through to inflation, after a process of increased exchange rate 
volatility; and inflation expectations, which rem ain deanchored and are drivers of future 
inflation behavior. It was emphasized that inflationary vectors remain adverse, such as 
the economic activity resilience and labor market pressures, deanchored inflation 
expectations, and high inflation projections.  This scenario prescribes a significantly 
contractionary monetary policy for a very prolonged period to ensure the convergence 
of inflation to the target.  
 
C) Discussion of the conduct of monetary policy  
18. Copom then discussed the conduct of monetary policy, considering the set of 
projections evaluated, as well as the balance of risks for prospective inflation.  
 
2 It corresponds to the rounded value of the average exchange rate observed over the ten working days 
ending on the last day of the week prior to the Copom meeting, according to the procedure adopted since 
the 258th meeting.  
271st Meeting  
COPOM  
June 17 -18 
  
6    bcb.gov.br  19. The Committee opted for an increase of 0.25 p.p., assessing that the economy is still 
resilient, which makes the convergence of inflation to the target difficult  and requires 
greater monetary tightening. Conversely, it was emphasized that the tightening cycle 
undertaken so far was particularly quick and very firm, reinforcing the understanding that, given the inherent lags to the monetary policy effects, a great  part of the impacts 
of the more contractionary rate is yet to come. As a result, the Committee 
communicated that it foresees an interruption of the rate hiking cycle to examine the 
yet-to-be-seen cumulative monetary policy impacts. It was emphasized again that 
building the required confidence to set the appropriate degree of monetary restriction over time requires that monetary policy channels be  unobstructed and with no 
elements mitigating their action.  
20. Following a swift and firm interest rate hike cycle, t he Committee anticipates , as its 
monetary policy strategy, the interruption of the rate hiking  cycle to observ e the effects 
of the cycle  already implemented and then evaluate whether the current interest rate 
is appropriate to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target . It was emphasized 
that, once the appropriate interest rate is determined, it should remain at a significantly contractionary level for a very prolonged period due to deanchored expectations. The 
Committee emphasizes that it will remain vigilant, that future monetary policy steps 
can be adjusted and that it will not hesitate to proceed with the rate hiking cycle if 
appropriate.  
 
D) Monetary policy decision  
21. The Committee continues to monitor closely how the developments on the fiscal 
side impact monetary policy and financial assets. The current scenario continues to be 
marked by deanchored inflation expectations, high inflation projections, resilience on 
economic activity, and labor market pressures. Ensuring the convergence of inflation to 
the target in an environment with deanchored expectations requires a significantly 
contractionary monetary policy for a very prolonged period.  
22. Copom decided to increase the Selic rate by 0.25 p.p. to 15.00% p.a., and judges 
that this decision is consistent with the strategy for inflation convergence to a level 
around its target throughout the relevant horizon for monetary policy. Without 
compromi sing its fundamental objective of ensuring price stability, this decision also 
implies smoothing economic fluctuations and fostering full employment.  
23. If the expected scenario materializes, the Committee foresees an interruption of 
the rate hiking cycle to examine its yet -to-be-seen cumulative impacts, and then 
evaluate whether the current interest rate level, assuming it stable for a very prolonged 
peri od, will be enough to ensure the convergence of inflation to the target. The 
Committee emphasizes that it will remain vigilant, that future monetary policy steps 
can be adjusted and that it will not hesitate to proceed with the rate hiking cycle if 
appropr iate.  
24. The following members of the Committee voted for this decision: Gabriel Muricca 
Galípolo (Governor), Ailton de Aquino Santos, Diogo Abry Guillen, Gilneu Francisco 
Astolfi Vivan, Izabela Moreira Correa, Nilton José Schneider David, Paulo Picchetti, 
Renato Dias de Brito Gomes, and Rodrigo Alves Teixeira.  
 
 
Table 1  
Inflation projections in the reference scenario  
Year -over -year IPCA change (%)  
 
Price Index  2025  2026  
271st Meeting  
COPOM  
June 17 -18 
  
7    bcb.gov.br  IPCA  4.9 3.6 
IPCA market prices  5.2 3.4 
IPCA administered prices  3.8 4.1 
 
