1. As mentioned in previous Copom minutes, the projections for the prices of oil by-products are still based on the changes in international oil prices and the exchange rate since the last price adjustment. Already taking into consideration the effects of the last adjustments in the January IPCA, an increase of 0.2% in the con- sumer price of gasoline is expected for 2003. For bottled gas, the price is expected to decline by 1.6% in

2003.

2. The projection for an increase in household electricity tariffs of 30.3% in 2003 was unchanged.

3. For the set of prices administered by contracts and monitored, which had a weight of 28.0% in the Decem- ber IPCA, increases of 14% and 8% are expected for 2003 and 2004, respectively. In relation to the projec- tions at the last meeting, there was a rise of 1 p.p. for 2003, due mainly to the revision of the estimated ad- justments in the prices of gasoline, urban transport and alcohol. For 2004, the increase of 0.4 p.p. was a consequence of the revision of the expectations for the IGP-M, since the Copom assumes that all the prices administered by contracts and monitored follow the change of the IGP-M for the specified year.

4. The projection for the 6-month spread over the Selic rate, which utilizes an error correction-based model specification, was 150 b.p. for the first quarter of 2003 and through the end of this year. Core inflation calculated with the exclusion of household food items and of administered prices - considering the broadened set of these items which had a weight of 28.0% in the December IPCA - registered a 1.66% increase in December, a significant rise in comparison to the observed changes of 1.17% in November, 0.74% in October and 0.61% in September. The 12-month accumulated change in December was 8.30%. Core inflation calculated under the trimmed-mean method registered a 1.36% increase in December, a small change in relation to November (1.32%) but significantly higher than in October (0.78%). For the year, the trimmed-mean core measure increased 8.84%. Regarding core inflation of the IPC-BR, calculated under the symmetric trimmed-mean method, the inflation rate reached 1.39% in December and 8.76% in 12-months. The increase of the IPCA accumulated in 12 months rose to 12.53% in December, after reaching 10.93% in No- vember, 8.44% in October and 7.93% in September. In the last twelve months, free market prices contributed 7.95 p.p. to inflation, while prices administered by contracts and monitored contributed 4.58 p.p. Regarding fiscal policy, it is assumed that the primary surplus target for this year and for the next years will be achieved. The other related assumptions established in the previous meeting were maintained. From the simulation exercises with several specifications of the structural model, it has been concluded that the maintenance of the interest rate at 25.0% p.a. and of the exchange rate at a level close to the level on the eve of the Copom meeting indicates inflation slightly above the adjusted target of 8.5% for 2003, as specified in the Open Letter of the Governor of the Banco Central do Brasil to the Minister of Finance on January 21, 2003. Monetary Policy Guidelines Economic activity has stabilized at a higher level than at the beginning of last year. In November, industrial produc- tion increased for the sixth consecutive month, supported by sectors linked to exports and non-durable goods. Economic indicators have been signaling that consumption should also continue to grow moderately in the upcom- ing months. Since August, the retail sector's revenues have remained stable in real terms at a relatively high level, slightly above the figures observed in 2000. Defaults are falling and, in January, future consumption intentions repeated the level of December, the highest since 2000. The disbursements of around R$10 billion from the FGTS during 2003 will also help to support consumption growth this year. Besides consumption, the growth of net exports is another factor that has been supporting aggregate demand, although its contribution to growth in 2003 may be lower than in 2002, considering the substantial expansion of the trade surplus last year. Last year, the large contraction in capital flows due to the increase in global risk aversion and the confidence crisis related to the Brazilian economy led to a strong adjustment in the current account deficit and, therefore, a more depreciated real exchange rate. In fact, the more depreciated exchange rate produced the external adjustment, with the current account deficit below US$8 billion in the year. On the other hand, there was great pressure on infla- tion in the last months of 2002. Despite the high inflation – considering only the last quarter the increase in IPCA reached 6.5% – inflation in 2002 can be more appropriately characterized as a change in relative prices, consider- ing that the prices of tradable goods increased more than the prices of non-tradables. Accordingly, monetary policy has been conducted in order to limit the effects of the exchange rate depreciation to the change in relative prices, preventing the propagation of this shock and facilitating the convergence of inflation to its targets. Since the last Copom meeting in December and, more visibly in the first weeks of January, an improvement in local financial markets has been observed as a consequence of lower risk perception. Mutual funds received net inflows, the FX coupon and fixed interest rates declined, and Brazilian banks and companies recovered access to external funding. Reflecting this better perception of Brazilian risk, the exchange rate appreciated, reaching the minimum level of R$3.28 per US dollar on January 14. However, during the days before the Copom meeting, the BRL started to depreciate again, mainly due to the possibility of war between the United States and Iraq. The median of 2003 inflation expectations surveyed by the Investor Relations Group has remained relatively stable at a high level. Expectations of the "top 5" institutions for the IPCA fell to 10.23% on January 17 from 13.49% on December 30, 2002. Moreover, the median of the expectations for the next two months indicate a decline of infla- tion to 1.12% in February and 0.65% in March. In fact, inflation indices have shown clear signs of deceleration. The increase in the IPCA fell to 2.10% in December from 3.02% in November. The increase in the IGP-DI declined to 2.70% in December from 5.84% in November. The increase in the IGP-10 fell to 2.29% in January from 4.87% in December. The increase in the IPA-10 declined to 2.60% in January from 5.91% in December. Finally, the increase in the IPC/Fipe fell to 1.83% in December and to 1.79% in the four-week period ended in the second week of January from 2.65% in November. Moreover, preliminary price data collected in recent weeks indicate that inflation is falling in January, most visibly in the segment of food and beverages, which slowed the most in the week previous to the Copom meeting. Inflation expectations for the year should decrease as soon as this trend is confirmed, in a context where monetary policy demonstrates its strong commitment in driving inflation to the targets. There will be no changes in the adjusted target during the year, except in the case of a relevant change in the fore- cast (upward or downward from the 14% already expected) for prices administered by contracts or monitored (ex- cluding the exchange rate change), since these prices are not directly affected by monetary policy. Although inflation has declined recently, inflation indices reached high levels at the end of last year, and the con- vergence of inflation to the adjusted targets depends on the speed at which inflation continues to fall. In this con- text, it is important to evaluate the impact on inflation of the accumulated 7 p.p. increase in the Selic rate that oc- curred in the last quarter of 2002. The maintenance of the target for the Selic rate at 25% would result in an infla- tion projection a little above the adjusted target of 8.5% in 2003. As a result, the Copom decided, unanimously, to increase the target for the Selic rate to 25.5% p.a. At the close of the meeting, it was announced that the Committee would meet again on February 18th, for technical presentations and on the following day, in order to discuss the monetary policy guidelines, as established in Com- muniqué 10,187, of October 2, 2002. Acronyms ACSP São Paulo Trade Association BCB Banco Central do Brasil b.p. basis points BRL Brazilian Real ECB European Central Bank Fecomércio São Paulo State’s Federation of Commerce FGTS Time in Service Guarantee Fund GDP Gross Domestic Product IBGE Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics IDB Interamerican Development Bank IGP-DI General Price Index – Domestic Supply IGP-M General Price Index – Market IIC Consumer Intentions Index IMF International Monetary Fund INCC National Index of Civil Construction IPA-DI Wholesale Price Index – Domestic Supply IPC-BR Consumer Price Index - Brazil IPC/FIPE Consumer Price Index of the Economic Research Institute Foundation IPCA Consumer Price Index – Extended LFT National Treasury Letters (floating) LTN National Treasury Letters (fixed rate) NTN-C National Treasury Note - C Series (price index) p.a. per annum p.m. per month p.p. percentage point