1. The projection for the increase in gasoline prices was revised to 8.0% for 2003, including the rises in the beginning of the year. An increase of 8.0 p.p. is forecasted for the prices of bottled gas, as compared to the January Copom meeting;

2. Regarding the previous meeting, the forecasted rise in household electricity tariffs for 2003 decreased to 27.1% from 30.3%, due to the revision of the readjustments proposed by the Aneel for this year;

3. For the set of regulated and monitored prices, which had a weight of 27.9% in the January IPCA, an in- crease of 15.9% is projected for 2003, from which 3.8% has already occurred in January. The decrease in the projections for household electricity tariffs was offset by higher prices of gasoline, bottled gas, urban transport, and interstate transport. For 2004, the forecast increase for the set of regulated and monitored prices is 8.7%. The increase of 0.7 p.p. compared to the January estimate was due to the revision of ex- pectations for the IGP-M, since the Copom assumes that all the regulated and monitored prices follow the change of the IGP-M for the specified year;

4. The projection for the 6-month spread over the Selic rate, which utilizes an error correction-based model specification, was 200 b.p. for the first quarter of 2003 though gradually reaching –150 b.p. at the end of

2004. Core inflation calculated with the exclusion of household food items and of regulated and monitored prices posted a 1.38% increase in January, a significant decrease in comparison to the 1.66% observed in December, but still higher than the observed in the previous months. In January, the 12-month accumulated change was 9.69%. Core inflation calculated under the trimmed-mean method registered a 1.32% increase in January, back to the value registered in November 2002 and slightly below the December figure (1.36%). In the last 12 months, the core in- creased by 9.70%. Regarding core inflation of IPC-BR, calculated under the symmetric trimmed-mean method, the inflation rate reached 1.39% in December and 8.76% in 12 months. The accumulated variation for the IPCA in 12 months increased to 14.47% in January 2003, as compared to 12.53% in December 2002. In the last 12 months, free market prices contributed 8.74 p.p. to inflation, while prices regulated and monitored contributed 5.73 p.p. Regarding fiscal policy, it is assumed that the primary surplus target for this year will be achieved (4.25%). The other related assumptions established in the previous meeting were maintained. From the simulation exercises with several specifications of the structural model, it has been concluded that the maintenance of the interest rate at 25.5% p.a. and of the exchange rate at the prevailing on the eve of the Copom meeting indicates inflation higher than the adjusted target of 8.5% for 2003. Monetary Policy Guidelines In the last year, the confidence crisis regarding the future of the Brazilian economy and the increase in global risk aversion resulted in a U$30 billion decrease in capital inflows to Brazil and a current account deficit adjustment of nearly 3% of the GDP. This external adjustment triggered a sharp exchange rate depreciation (44%), since GDP has grown around 1.6%. The significant exchange rate depreciation represented an important shift in relative prices, what resulted in an inflation rate of 6.6% in the last quarter of 2002. This higher inflation was the major cost inherited from the last year crisis. The Brazilian economy has been reacting to the last year shock through measures that have recovered the confi- dence and allowed capital flows to return. The FX inflow was positive in January (US$1.1 billion) for the first time since March 2002, a trend sustained in February. Regarding the primary placement of public securities, the Treas- ury has been issuing larger volumes of LFT with no pressures on yields or tenures. On its turn, inflation to the con- sumer has been decelerating. IPCA moved from the 3.02% peak in November to 2.25% in January. Similarly, free market prices inflation has been decreasing since the 2.53% peak in November to 2.32% in December and 1.64% in January. There are reasons to believe that inflation may continue to decrease. On one hand, economic activity seems to be decelerating. In the retail sector, the sharpened decrease in real sales in December reflects the fall of real income and worsened credit conditions for the consumers. Industrial production, in the same month, interrupted the grow- ing trajectory drawn in the previous six months and, based on leading indicators, may continue to move backwards in January. In this sense, it is important to consider the future impact on inflation of the accumulated increase of 750 b.p. in the over-Selic rate since last October. On the other hand, the maintenance of the pace of capital inflows observed in the beginning of this year may imply a higher supply in the FX market and, on a less adverse external scenario, allow some favorable pressure on the exchange rate. Notwithstanding, there is the risk of inflation to continue in a high level, as the current inflation level shows some rigidity. Due to the inertial mechanism of price formation in the Brazilian economy, the high inflation of the last year has been reflecting in a higher inflation in the beginning of this year. IPCA core inflation in January moved back- ward as compared to the previous month, but the variation was higher than the observed in the three first quarters of 2002. Estimates for consumer price indices in February continue to show high rates of inflation, higher than in January. In the second 4-week estimate of February, IPC-Fipe increased by 2.13%, slightly below the first week (2.23%), but well above the second preview of January (1.79%). Preliminary data of prices collected in the last weeks indicate that free market prices inflation has been decreasing in February, even though there is a strong pressure of items such as in natura food and school fees. However, the results of these price collections suggest a high variation in the IPCA compared to the adjusted inflation target tra- jectory. As in the last years’ trend, regulated and monitored prices continue to put a strong pressure on the consumer infla- tion. In January, IPCA inflation moved upward due to the significant increase in regulated and monitored prices (3.83%), 2.3 times higher than the free prices average increase. Even weighting 27.9%, regulated and monitored prices were responsible for 47% of the January IPCA rate and 40% of the IPCA accumulated in the last 12 months. As an example, while free market prices inflation reached 1.64% in January, the price of gasoline for the consumer rose by 8.82%, the major individual contribution to IPCA in the month. This increase was due to the passthrough of the 12.8% rise in the refineries on last December 29, besides the increase caused by changes in the basis for cal- culating the ICMS. Alcohol-based fuel prices increased by 5.96% in January, as compared to 2.96% in the previous month, mainly because of rises endorsed by producers. Prices of diesel oil increased by 11.88% in January, added to the 8.01% increase in December. Price increase in January reflected mainly the 11.3% readjustment in the refin- eries on December 29. The readjustment of 4.99% in urban transport fares has also put a strong pressure on regulated prices in January, even after the strong increase in December (2.67%). Local governments of Belo Horizonte (10.43%), São Paulo (10.00%), Salvador (8.18%), Porto Alegre (4.17%), and Fortaleza (1.67%) practiced the most significant increases. Interstate bus fares were also readjusted by 7.18%, with pressure coming from the increases in Belo Horizonte (17.18%), São Paulo (12.63%), Belém (6.36%), Porto Alegre (5.93%) and Salvador (5.33%). Moreover, the 2.73% increase in the household electricity tariff was due to the readjustments in Rio de Janeiro (10.97%) and Brasília (8.43%). In Rio, one of the concessionaries carried out a 28.56% contractual readjustment. It should be highlighted that the effects of the readjustments in regulated and monitored prices may not only con- tribute directly to inflation but also risk propagating secondarily to free market prices. It is important to say that over the three first quarters of 2003 the 12-month accumulated inflation shall remain high, carrying the statistical effects of the inflation of the last quarter of 2002. Under this scenario, it is important the per- ception that inflation over 2003 keeps falling. Copom understands that in this moment, when inertia in Brazilian economy transfers the impact of the last year’s shock to a higher inflation this year, monetary policy should be firm enough to eliminate the risk of a shift in the inflation level. So, Copom evaluates an additional effort in monetary policy as appropriate. Besides, Copom understands that not only the economic policy actions of the Government but also the reactions of the society against inflation are important to a less costly reduction of inflation. In this sense, recent measures adopted by the Government aiming at reaffirming fiscal responsibility and fiscal consistence together with structural reforms are beneficial not only in the direct related areas but also boost the monetary policy efficiency. As the Bra- zilian experience clearly shows, the effort that society make to keep prices stable is fundamental to protect itself against the inflation tax and its regressive impacts and to the development strategy. The stability ensures the ca- pacity of planning and investing through a more accurate predictability and lengthening of horizons. As a result, the Copom decided, unanimously, to increase the target for the over-Selic rate to 26.5% p.a. After- wards, the Central Bank’s Board decided, unanimously, to increase the reserve requirements on demand deposits to 60% from 45% as to contribute for the fall in inflation in the coming months and to diversify the instruments of monetary policy. At the close of the meeting, it was announced that the Committee would meet again on March 18th, for technical presentations, and on the following day, in order to discuss the monetary policy guidelines, as established in Com- muniqué 10,187, of October 2, 2002. Acronyms ACSP São Paulo Trade Association Aneel National Electric Energy Agency b.p. basis points BRL Brazilian Real Fecomércio-SP São Paulo State’s Federation of Commerce FGTS Time in Service Guarantee Fund GDP Gross Domestic Product IBGE Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics ICMS Tax on the Circulation of Goods and Services IGP–DI General Price Index – Domestic Supply IGP–M General Price Index – Market IIC Consumer Intentions Index INCC National Index of Civil Construction IPA Wholesale Price Index IPC–BR Consumer Price Index – Brazil IPC-FIPE Consumer Price Index of the Economic Research Institute Foundation IPCA Consumer Price Index - Extended LFT National Treasury Letters (floating) LTN National Treasury Letters (fixed rate) NTN–C National Treasury Note – C Series (price index) p.a. per annum p.m. per month p.p. percentage point s.a. seasonally adjusted UN United Nations