The members of the Monetary Policy Committee analyzed the recent performance of, and prospects for the 
Brazilian and international economies under the monetary policy framework, designed to comply with the inflation 
targets established by the government. 
 
Recent Evolution of Inflation 
 
1. In April, most measures of inflation registered their smallest monthly increases since September of 2002. 
This development was most pronounced in wholesale price indices, mainly due to the effects of the recent 
exchange rate appreciation and seasonal contribution of agricultural goods prices. The decline in consumer 
price inflation was smaller, reflecting a modest deceleration in market price inflation and increases in 
regulated prices. 
 
2. The IPCA increased 0.97% in April, in comparison to 1.23% in the previous month, accumulating 6.15% in 
the first four months of 2003 and 16.77% in 12 months. The IGP-DI increased 0.41% in April, compared to 
1.66% in March. The IPA-DI rose by 0.07% in April, in comparison to 1.93% in the previous month. The 12-
month increase of the IGP-DI and IPA-DI fell after having increased for eleven consecutive months, totaling 
32.37% and 42.65%, respectively. 
 
3. The deceleration of IPCA inflation resulted exclusively from the evolution of market prices, which increased 
0.87% in April, compared to 1.29% in March. Among market prices, the main contribution to the slowdown 
 
1

came from food prices, thanks particularly to the normalization of the supply of perishable foods, reflecting 
more favorable weather conditions. As a consequence, prices of perishable food increased 1.78% in April, 
in comparison to 7.17% in March. Among tradable goods apart from food items, the smaller increase of the 
IPCA was due to the behavior of the prices of medicines, household goods and cleaning and personal 
hygiene products, which increased less than in the previous month. However, due to seasonal effects, 
clothing items posted a higher increase in April (1.03%) than in March (0.6%). 
 
4. Regulated prices increased 1.21% in April, up from 1.08% in March, contributing 0.35 p.p. to the IPCA 
result in the month. An increase in the price of electricity made the largest single contribution to the 
increase in the IPCA (0.13 p.p), reflecting tariff hikes in six metropolitan regions. Additionally, urban bus 
tariffs, bottled cooking gas (whose price remained stable at the refinery level), water and sewage tariffs and 
the price of airplane tickets all registered increases. 
 
5. Regarding the evolution of wholesale prices, one should highlight the effects of the exchange rate 
appreciation and the normalization of the supply of perishable foods. The agricultural component of the IPA 
decreased 0.99% in April, after a 0.3% increase in March, mainly due to declines in the prices of fruits and 
legumes (7.05%) and export crops (5.49%). The industrial component of the IPA increased 0.48%, 
compared to 2.56% in March, reflecting the deceleration of price increases in most of the industrial sectors.  
 
6. Core IPCA inflation calculated by excluding household food items and regulated prices was 0.81% in April, 
compared to 1.13% in March, but still above the levels observed in the first three quarters of 2002. The 
accumulated change in 12 months was 10.53%. 
 
7. Core IPCA inflation calculated under the trimmed-mean method registered a 1.10% increase in April, higher 
than the headline index. In the last 12 months, trimmed-mean core inflation accumulated an increase of 
11.43%, as compared to 10.8% in March. 
 
8. Core IPC-Br inflation calculated under the symmetric trimmed-mean method registered a 1.2% increase in 
April. In 12 months, core IPC-Br inflation accumulated a 11.37% increase. 
 
9. In May, the positive effects of the exchange rate appreciation on inflation are likely to increase, particularly 
on wholesale prices, as signaled by recent previews of the IGP-M. With respect to consumer prices, 
tradable goods will also benefit from the exchange rate appreciation, and in conjunction with the fall of 
perishable food and fuel prices will contribute to the downward trend of inflation. However, upward 
pressures from clothing prices and electricity tariffs (due to both increase of household electricity and 
implementation of public light tariffs) will prevent this effect from being more pronounced. 
 
Assessment of Inflation Trends 
 
10. The identified shocks and their impacts were reassessed according to newly available information. The 
scenario considered in the simulations assumes the following hypothesis: 
 
a. Estimated price adjustments for gasoline in 2003 are around 6%, including the reduction at the 
beginning of May. The projection for the readjustment of the price of bottled cooking gas for 2003 
increased to 4.5%, due to the 4.13% increase in April. 
b. With respect to household electricity tariffs, estimated readjustments decreased again as a result of 
the exchange rate appreciation, reaching 23.7% for 2003. This rate could be lower, were it not for the 
charges of public lighting in several capitals, including Curitiba, São Paulo, Fortaleza, Recife, Belo 
Horizonte, Goiânia and some municipalities of greater Rio de Janeiro. 
c. Regulated prices, which had a 28.6% weight in the April IPCA, are forecast to increase 14.9% in 
2003. Despite the increase of in the projection for bottled cooking gas, the decrease of gasoline 
 
2

prices, the exchange rate appreciation and the consequent reassessment of electricity price 
readjustment resulted in a 0.4 p.p. fall from the April projections for regulated prices. 
d. The projection for the 6-month spread over the Selic rate, following the specification of the VAR model 
using the Selic and swap rates on the eve of the Copom meeting was 80 b.p. for 4Q03, gradually 
rising to 150 b.p. at the end of 2004. 
 
11. Regarding fiscal policy, it is assumed that the public sector will accomplish the primary surplus target for 
this year and the following two years (4.25% of the GDP). The other related assumptions established in the 
April Copom meeting were maintained.  
 
12. Considering the baseline scenario hypotheses, including a steady interest rate at 26.5% p.a. and the 
exchange rate at the level prevailing on the eve of the Copom meeting, inflation is projected above the 
adjusted target of 8.5% for 2003. 
 
 
Monetary Policy Decision 
 
13. Inflation remains on a downward trend. Wholesale price inflation has been decreasing more than consumer 
price inflation. There is evidence that the dynamics of the two groups of prices have been different. At the 
wholesale level, the exchange rate appreciation and the normalization of the supply of perishable food 
have been the main factors underlying the decrease in inflation.  
 
14. However, the deceleration of consumer price inflation has not been as significant. Regulated prices 
increased by 0.34 p.p. more than market prices, due to items such as water and sewage, bottled cooking 
gas, electricity, urban bus fares, airplane tickets, motor oil and cellular phones. Market price inflation 
declined, largely due to smaller price increases in services and items linked to the exchange rate. 
 
15. GDP may close the first quarter of 2003 roughly stable in comparison to the previous quarter. On the one 
hand, manufacturing output fell. On the other hand, the mineral extraction industry, the agricultural sector 
and the tradable goods sector registered positive performance. 
 
16. The resistance to a more rapid decline in consumer price inflation points to the existence of increased 
inflation persistence in the economy. The prices of important groups in the consumption basket have 
increased significantly, although at a decelerating rate, including beverages, canned products, cleaning and 
personal hygiene products and furniture and utensils. Consequently, core inflation still remains at a high 
level. 
 
17. This persistence is due to wage and price readjustments that have occurred since the beginning of the year 
and that have been based on the high inflation rate accumulated in the last twelve months, rather than 
assessments of future inflation. Also, businesses have made an effort to regain profit margins in a scenario 
of falling aggregated demand. This behavior resulted in a significant decrease in sales. Retail sales 
decreased 6% in the first quarter of the year compared to the same period of the previous year. 
 
18. The Copom believes that monetary policy should not ratify price and wage readjustments based on past 
inflation, due to the risk of perpetuating higher inflation. 
 
19. There are initial signs that monetary policy is curbing inflation. The Copom as well as market participants 
expect inflation to maintain a declining trend towards its target. These favorable expectations regarding 
inflation are based on the following assumptions: (i) inflation persistence is temporary; (ii) the recent 
exchange rate appreciation positively affects price dynamics (in the same way that the exchange rate 
depreciation affected inflation).  
 
 
3

20. Since inflation remains relatively high, it is still premature to conclude that inflation persistence is definitively 
decreasing and that the effect of the exchange rate appreciation on prices is significant. Thus, the Copom 
concludes that the decrease of inflation depends on the maintenance of its current effort. 
 
21. As a result, the Copom decided, unanimously, to maintain the target for the Over-Selic rate at 26.5% p.a.  
 
22. At the closing of the meeting, it was announced that the Copom would meet again on June 17, for technical 
presentations and on the following day, in order to discuss the monetary policy decision, as established in 
the Communiqué 10,187, of October 2, 2002.  
  
 
 
4

Summary of Data Analyzed by the Copom 
 
Economic Activity  
 
23. Carnival holidays in March reduced the number of working days to 19, compared to 20 days in the previous 
month and in March 2002. As a result, the comparisons of production and sales data contain statistical 
distortions that have not been eliminated by the usual seasonal adjustment. The March 2003 results are 
underestimated the same way that data in February was overestimated. 
 
24. Having eliminated the working day effect by using the quarterly moving average, it is clear that the growth 
rates of industrial production and industrial and retail sales decreased in 1Q2003, compared to the same 
period last year and the last quarter of 2002. 
 
25. According to the IBGE, the national retail sales index fell 11.3% in March and 6% in the 1Q2003, when 
compared to the same period of 2002. The negative performance hit all the retail sectors and states in 
Brazil. Data from Fecomércio–SP also show a fall of 4.7% in real retail sales in the metropolitan area of 
São Paulo in March, compared to the same month in 2002. However, accumulated sales in the first quarter 
showed an increase of 7.3%. 
 
26. Data on sales with checks and credit purchases, released by the ACSP, confirmed the downward trend of 
the retail market in March and in the first quarter of this year. 
 
27. The monthly Fecomércio–SP survey showed an improvement in consumer confidence in May. The IIC 
reached 104.3, compared to 100.3 in April (out of a 0-200 range). Both components of the IIC increased: 
current consumer intentions rose by 0.4 p.p. while future intentions increased by 5.7 p.p. 
 
28. The main investment indices declined in 1Q2003. The difficult economic scenario and the governmental 
transition period contributed to a postponement of investment decisions, both in the public and the private 
sectors. Civil construction, which is responsible for more than 60% of gross fixed capital formation, 
decreased 2.1%, compared to the first quarter of 2002. Considering s.a. data, the fall in the first quarter this 
year reached 5.7%, in relation to the last quarter of 2002. 
 
29. Although capital goods production was roughly stable in the first quarter compared to the same period of 
2002 (increase of 0.5%), it fell 3.5% in relation to the last quarter of 2002, s.a. By sector, it is important to 
note the continuous expansion in the production of machinery and agricultural equipment, due to the 
increase in the income of the agricultural sector and the significant decrease in energy generating 
equipment. This decrease was a consequence of the high figures registered last year, when investment in 
this area was stimulated by the energy crisis. 
 
30. Industrial production decreased 3.4% in March compared to the previous month, s.a., according to the 
IBGE. Discounting the working days effect, industrial production recorded an increase of 0.1% in the 
month. 
 
31. The data shows that the behavior of the industrial sector in March was consistent with developments that 
have been observed since mid-2002, with the best performance in the intermediate goods sector, relating 
to the expansion of exports, and the agricultural and oil extraction sectors. The consumer goods sector 
showed significant declines. 
 
32. Considering 1Q2003, the manufacturing and mineral extraction industries increased 2.1% and 4.8%, 
respectively, compared to 1Q2002. Industry grew 2.5% year-on-year, but fell 1.1% in relation to the 
performance observed in 4Q2002. 
 
 
5

33. Data on real sales and hours worked in the manufacturing sector released by the CNI also indicated a 
decrease of industrial activity during the first quarter. Although the accumulated data in the quarter posted 
positive growth compared to the same period last year (7,4% and 2,4%, respectively), they were lower by 
2.5% and 1% in relation to the data observed in the last quarter of 2003. Installed capacity utilization 
reached 79.8% in March, s.a., compared to 80.2% recorded in the same month of 2002. 
 
34. Other indicators related to industrial performance showed positive results in April. Production of corrugated 
paperboard grew 11.3% month-on-month, s.a., according to the data released by the ABPO. Gross steel 
production increased 2.5% month-on-month, according to data released by the IBS. 
 
 
Labor Market  
 
35. Legally registered employment increased 0.2% month-on-month in April, s.a., and 3.3% in the first four-
months compared to the same period of 2002, according to the Ministry of Labor and Employment. 
According to the new methodology for the IBGE’s employment survey, the unemployment rate in the six 
main metropolitan areas reached 12.1% in March, compared to 11.6% in February, despite the increase of 
0.1% in the number of employed workers in the same period. 
  
36. The IBGE also verified an increase in informal work in the last twelve months. While the number of formal 
employees increased 3.3% between March of 2002 and March of 2003, the number of informal employees 
grew 9.3%. In addition, according to the PME, the average real wage of employed workers fell by 4.9% 
compared to the same month of 2002. In the industrial sector, according to the CNI, the real payroll in 
March was 7.7% lower than in March 2002. 
 
Credit and Delinquency Rates  
 
37. Total non-earmarked bank credit decreased 0.4% in April, with the largest decline in the corporate portfolio 
as a result of the effects of the 13.8% exchange rate appreciation on dollar-indexed loans. Domestically 
funded credit to companies grew 1%, driven mostly by the increase of corporate overdraft accounts and 
working capital loans. The results indicate that companies have been choosing short-term debt in order to 
recompose cash flows. ACC operations grew 1.7%, mirroring the robust performance of the export sector 
and the progressive normalization of external commercial lines. Credit to individuals increased 2.2%, 
highlighting larger demand for short-term credits. 
 
38. The average interest rate on credit operations in April increased 0.6 p.p., reaching 58.4% p.a. In the month, 
fixed rate loans fell in some segments, mirroring the reduction in the slope of the yield curve as a result of 
the improvement in the sovereign-risk premium and the expectations of falling inflation. 
 
39. The delinquency rate on non-earmarked bank credits increase to 8.8% in April from 8.7% in March. For 
individuals the rate remained at 15.7% while for companies it increased 0.1 p.p. to 4.6%. 
 
40. Regarding default rates on retail credit, there was a slight improvement in April. ACSP data showed that 
the number of new delinquency registrations and the amount of cancelled registrations fell 13.2% and 
8.1%, respectively, compared to the previous month, reducing the net delinquency rate to 7%, compared to 
7.2% in March. The volume of returned checks fell from 5.9% of the total settled in March to 5.6% in April. 
 
 
External Environment  
 
41. GDP in the Euro Area and Japan remained stable in 1Q2003 compared to the previous quarter, while in the 
US GDP growth (1.6% annualized) was lower than expected. 
 
 
6

42. The recovery of the global economy continues to depend on a stronger recovery of growth in the US, which 
is still showing evidence of macroeconomic fragilities: industrial production fell 0.5% in April; capacity 
utilization stands at 74.4%, the lowest level since 1983; retail sales declined; and the trade deficit 
increased.  
 
43. The unemployment rate in the Euro area increased in April, reaching 8.7%, while in the US it stood at 6%. 
Business confidence in industrialized countries points to a contraction in economic activity. Regarding 
consumers, pessimism persists in Europe. However, there was a slight improvement in the US. 
 
44. In addition to the weak performance of industrialized economies, the spread of SARS is a new concern for 
the world economy, and growth in China and the countries of Southeast Asia may be significantly 
damaged. The volatility of oil prices remains high, and the downward trend in prices was partially reversed 
after the approval of the cut in production by OPEC countries, and the disturbance caused by a new wave 
of terrorist attacks. 
 
45. The inflation shows signs of falling in the main economies. In the US, consumer price indices in April 
registered the largest fall in nineteen months, fostering the perception that deflation risks are increasing. 
The weakening of the dollar may decrease this perception, and contribute to an improvement in the activity 
and a reduction of the US trade deficit. However, the appreciation of the euro increases the risks of 
deflation and recession in Europe. 
 
46. Central banks decided to keep interest rates unaltered in their last meetings. Official interest rates remain 
at their lowest levels of the last four decades in the US (1.25%), the Euro area (2.5%), and the UK (3.75%). 
In Japan, they have been zero since 1999.  
 
Foreign Sector  
 
47. The trade surplus reached US$1.7 billion in April, accumulating US$5.5 billion in the first four months of 
2003, basically due to the performance of exports which have grown sharply, while imports remained 
stable. 
 
48. Exports reached US$5.7 billion in April and US$20.8 billion year-to-date, increasing 23.1% in the month 
and 25.6% in the first four months compared to 2002. Imports decreased 3.6% in April, reaching US$4 
billion, and increased 1.8% in the first four months of the year, reaching US$15.3 billion, compared to 2002. 
 
49. Current account showed a deficit of US$966 million in April, 50.9% less than in the same month of 2002. 
The deficit in the services and income account reached US$2.9 billion, not completely compensated by the 
positive results of the trade balance (US$1.7 billion) and unilateral transfers (US$205 million). The 12-
month current account deficit reached 0.74% of GDP in April. 
 
Monetary Market and Open Market Operations  
 
50. After the last Copom meeting, the yield curve shifted downwards, mainly for maturities over 6 months, 
increasing the negative slope of the curve.  A decline in sovereign country risk, appreciation of the 
exchange rate, deceleration of inflation and market expectations of a larger reduction of inflation in the 
second half of the year contributed to this movement. On May 20th, the spreads of 6-month and 1-year 
rates were –204 b.p. and –293 b.p. respectively, compared to –166 b.p. and –179 b.p. on April 23rd. 
 
51. Securities and swaps maturing since the previous meeting have been rolled over through swaps with terms 
ranging from 4 to 56 months (11 months on average). Lower placement rates, as compared to the previous 
period, were due to the overall reduction in the dollar-linked interest rate curve. 
 
52. Since the March Copom meeting, the Treasury has offered LTNs five times, for an amount totaling R$9.9 
billion. The significant demand for these securities and the movement in the domestic yield curve allowed 
 
7

the offer of increasing amounts, longer average tenures, and lower rates than in the previous period. Four 
issues of LFTs were also made at longer terms and lower rates, totaling US$23.7 billion. 
 
53. The settlement of securities between April 24th and May 21st caused a contractionary monetary impact of 
R$8.2 billion, as a result of net placements of R$9.9 billion in LTNs and US$3.3 billion in LFTs, partially 
offset by net redemptions of R$5.2 billion of dollar indexed securities. 
 
54. In the same period, the Central Bank intervened weekly in the open market through 1-week, 2-week, and 1-
month repo operations, and conducted daily liquidity management operations with maturities of 2 working 
days. These operations withdrew excess liquidity of R$52.8 billion on average.  
 
55. As a result of the appreciation of the real, domestic securitized public debt fell by R$5.3 billion (-0.8%) in 
April, while the share linked to the dollar decreased to 30.4% from 34.7%. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8

Acronyms 
 
ABPO   
 
Brazilian Corrugated Board Association  
ACSP  
  
São Paulo Trade Association 
b.p.  
 
 
basis points 
CNI 
 
 
National Confederation of Industry 
Fecomércio-SP  
São Paulo State’s Federation of Commerce 
GDP 
 
 
Gross Domestic Product 
IBGE   
 
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics 
IBS  
 
 
Brazilian Steel Institute 
IGP–DI   
 
General Price Index – Domestic Supply 
IGP–M   
 
General Price Index – Market 
IIC 
 
  
Consumer Intentions Index 
INCC 
 
  
National Index of Civil Construction 
IPA 
 
 
Wholesale Price Index  
IPC–BR 
  
Consumer Price Index – Brazil 
IPCA 
 
  
Consumer Price Index - Extended 
LFT  
 
  
National Treasury Bills (floating) 
LTN  
 
 
National Treasury Bills (fixed rate)  
OPEC  
 
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
p.a.  
 
  
per annum 
p.p. 
 
  
percentage point 
PME 
 
 
Monthly Employment Survey 
s.a.  
 
 
seasonally adjusted 
SARS  
 
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome  
VAR 
 
 
Vector AutoRegressive 
 
 
9
